University of Alabama at Birmingham
AUTHORIZATION FOR USE/DISCLOSURE OF HEALTH INFORMATION 
FOR RESEARCH


What is the purpose of this form?  You are being asked to sign this form so that UAB may use and release your health information for research.  Participation in research is voluntary.  If you choose to participate in the research, you must sign this form so that your health information may be used for the research.

Participant Name:  			UAB IRB Protocol Number:  F#########Research Protocol:  Evaluation of the Safety and Efficacy of Trimycin vs. Hydrochlorothiazide in the Treatment of HypertensionPrincipal Investigator:  John Doe, Ph.D.Sponsor:  Wise Drug Company, Inc.What health information do the researchers want to use?  All medical information and personal identifiers, including past, present, and future history, examinations, laboratory results, imaging studies and reports and treatments of whatever kind related to or collected for use in the research protocol.

Why do the researchers want my health information?  The researchers want to use your health information as part of the research protocol listed above and described to you in the Informed Consent document.

Who will disclose, use and/or receive my health information?  The physicians, nurses and staff working on the research protocol (whether at UAB or elsewhere); other operating units of UAB, HSF, UAB Highlands, Children’s of Alabama, Eye Foundation Hospital and the Jefferson County Department of Public Health, as necessary for their operations; the IRB and its staff; the sponsor of the research and its employees; and outside regulatory agencies, such as the Food and Drug Administration.

How will my health information be protected once it is given to others?  Your health information that is given to the study sponsor will remain private to the extent possible, even though the study sponsor is not required to follow the federal privacy laws. However, once your information is given to other organizations that are not required to follow federal privacy laws, we cannot assure that the information will remain protected.

How long will this Authorization last?  Your authorization for the uses and disclosures described in this Authorization does not have an expiration date.

Can I cancel the Authorization?  You may cancel this Authorization at any time by notifying the Principal Investigator, in writing, referencing the Research Protocol and IRB Protocol Number. If you cancel this Authorization, the study doctor and staff will not use any new health information for research. However, researchers may continue to use the health information that was provided before you cancelled your authorization.

Can I see my health information?  You have a right to request to see your health information. However, to ensure the scientific integrity of the research, you will not be able to review the research information until after the research protocol has been completed.

Signature of participant: 								Date: 		

or participant's legally authorized representative: 					Date: 		

Printed Name of participant’s representative: 				

Relationship to the participant: 						






Page 1 of 1
Version Date: 05/29/14





