
Principal Investigator:	
COMIRB No:	
Version Date:			

Study Title:	



You are being asked to be in a research study.  This form provides you with information about the study. A member of the research team will describe this study to you and answer all of your questions. Please read the information below and ask questions about anything you don’t understand before deciding whether or not to take part. 
. 
Why is this study being done?
[Please describe the overall goal and why the reader has been invited to participate.  Start this section by completing the sentence below.]
This study plans to learn more about…
You are being asked to be in this research study because…
[Indicate the number of participants. Do not use the term “approximately”.]
Up to <indicate number> people from your area will participate in the study. 
Up to <indicate number> people around the country will be in the study.
What happens if I join this study?
[Start by completing the sentence below.]
If you join the study, you will…
[Identify any procedures that are experimental]
   [Indicate how long study participation will last.]

What are the possible discomforts or risks?
Discomforts you may experience while in this study include… 

Other possible risks include…

If you become pregnant, the particular treatment or procedures involved in the study may involve risks to the embryo or fetus which are currently unclear. (If applicable)
 [Please describe any risks in a language appropriate to the reader.
• For studies that involve psychological risk and/or emotional risk (many of the studies that are done by DDC faculty/students do not involve physical risk, but rather the possibility of psychological and/or emotional risk from participation):  The principles are similar to those that involve physical risk. Participants should be informed of the risk. They should be given the names and telephone numbers of agencies that may alleviate their mental concerns, such as a crisis hot-line. If the principal investigator or the faculty advisor of a student investigator is qualified to treat mental health problems, that person may be listed as a resource.
• If the risks of any research procedure are not well known, for example because of limited experience in humans, the consent must include a statement that the particular treatment or procedure may involve risks to the participant, which are currently unforeseeable.
o If this is applicable, state: The study may include risks that are unknown at this time.]
What are the possible benefits of the study?
 [Reimbursement for participation is not considered a benefit.  Also note that there may not be a benefit to participation.]   

This study is designed for the researcher to learn more about ________.”  

This study is not designed to treat any illness or to improve your health.  Also, there may be risks, as discussed in the section describing the discomforts or risks.
Are there alternative treatments? (include section, if applicable)
[For therapeutic treatment-based research, disclose the appropriate alternative procedures or courses of treatment, if any, which might be advantageous to the participant.]
Who is paying for this study? (include section, if applicable)
[For research that is supported by a funding agency or sponsor
• If this is applicable state:  This research is being paid for by <insert name>.]
Will I be paid for being in the study?
[Choose statement that applies]
You will be paid $XX.XX for each visit in this study (if the amount will vary from visit to visit, state the different amounts and visit types).  This will add up to a total of $XXX.XX if you complete all of the visits <if  some subjects may get a particular procedure while others may not, break this into different amounts and explain>.  If you leave the study early, or if we have to take you out of the study, you will be paid only for the visits you have completed.
It is important to know that payments for participation in a study is taxable income. 

You will not be paid to be in the study.
[Please include subject pool credit, extra-credit, class-credit, research credit, monetary compensation, and gift certificates, etc.  If study payments will be divided, please explain the planned payment schedule and how it will be prorated if the subject drops out of the study.]  

Will I have to pay for anything?
[Choose statement that applies]
You will need to pay for…
It will not cost you anything to be in the study.
Is my participation voluntary?
Taking part in this study is voluntary.  You have the right to choose not to take part in this study.  If you choose to take part, you have the right to stop at any time.  If you refuse or decide to withdraw later, you will not lose any benefits or rights to which you are entitled.

If this is applicable state: If you leave this study, you will still receive your normal medical care.  The only medical care that you will lose is the medical care you are getting as part of this study.  You might be able to get that same kind of medical care outside of the study.  Ask your study doctor.

[In certain types of research where the risks and benefits are not well known, researchers may discover new information that may affect a participant’s willingness to participate.  
• If this is applicable state:  If there are any new findings during the study that may affect whether you want to continue to take part, you will be told about them.]
Can I be removed from this study? 
The study doctor may decide to stop your participation without your permission if the study doctor thinks that being in the study may cause you harm, or for any other reason. Also, the sponsor may stop the study at any time [If applicable].
What happens if I am injured or hurt during the study? (include section, if applicable)
[Plans for injury and compensation must be included for research involving more than minimal risk]

If applicable, state:  If you have an injury while you are in this study, you should call <insert name> immediately.  [His/her] phone number is <insert phone number>. 

   [Choose one of the following two options, depending on the arrangements with Sponsor]

1. We will arrange to get you medical care if you have an injury that is caused by this research.  However, you or your insurance company will have to pay for that care. 

2. If you are hurt by this research, we will give you medical care.  Medical treatment will be provided at no cost to you or your insurance company for a research-related injury. The sponsor and the investigator will determine if your injury or illness is research-related.  The term “research-related injury” means physical injury caused by drugs or procedures required by the study which are different from the medical treatment you would have received if you had not participated in the trial.
Who do I call if I have questions?
The researcher carrying out this study is <investigator name>. You may ask any questions you have now. If you have questions, concerns, or complaints later, you may call <investigator name> at <investigator phone number>. You will be given a copy of this form to keep.  

You may have questions about your rights as someone in this study. You can call <investigator name> with questions.  You can also call the responsible Institutional Review Board (COMIRB).  You can call them at 303-724-1055. 

Who will see my research information?
We will do everything we can to keep your records a secret.  It cannot be guaranteed. 
Both the records that identify you and the consent form signed by you may be looked at by others. 
 These include:
• Federal agencies that monitor human subject research
• People at the Colorado Multiple Institutional Review Board (COMIRB)
• The group doing the study
• The group paying for the study
• Regulatory officials from the institution where the research is being conducted who want to make sure the research is safe
The results from the research may be shared at a meeting.  The results from the research may be in published articles.  Your name will be kept private when information is presented.

[Mandated Reporting of Child Abuse, Neglect or Threatened Violence
If the project involves situations that may reasonably elicit a response indicating the existence of child abuse, child neglect, suicide ideation, or threatened violence against another specific person that will be reported the following statement must be added:  
• If applicable, state: Some things we cannot keep private.   If you give us any information about child abuse or neglect we have to report that to <state Social Services or other agency>.  Also, if we get a court order to turn over your study records, we will have to do that.
• If applicable, state: Some things we cannot keep private: If you tell us you are going to physically hurt yourself or someone else, we have to report that to the <state police or other agency>.  Also, if we get a court order to turn over your study records, we will have to do that.]

[Photography, Video, and Audio Recordings 
Additional statements concerning confidentiality must be included for research involving imaging and recording.
• If applicable, indicate how they will be protected (e.g. under lock and key) and their disposition (e.g. will be kept X years, then erased).]
Agreement to be in this study
I have read this paper about the study or it was read to me.  I understand the possible risks and benefits of this study.  I know that being in this study is voluntary.  I choose to be in this study: I will get a copy of this consent form.

Signature:									Date:			
Print Name:								
Consent form explained by:						Date:			
Print Name:								
Investigator:									Date:			
Consent Form 


Consent Template without HIPAA		Subject Initials ______
CF-154, Effective 9-1-2011
	Page 1 of 1

