CONSENT FORM: DENTAL 1MPLANTYS1
Part 1 - Patient & Doctor Information
Patient Name:,
Doctor Name:.

-NIO

In order for me to make an informed decision about undergoing a procedure, I should have certain information about the proposed
procedure, the associated risks, the alternatives and the consequences of not having it. The doctor has provided me with this information
to my satisfaction. The following is a summary of this information. This form is meant to provide me with the information I need to make a
good decision; it is not meant to alarm me.

Part 2 - Details of Consent
Condition
My doctor has explained the nature of my condition to me: Missing tooth or teeth.

Procedure - Dental Implant
My physician has proposed the following procedure to treat or diagnose my condition: Dental implant This means: Surgically place an
implant into the supporting jawbone.
While we believe that patients have a right to be informed about any treatment, the law requires extensive disclosure of the risks of
surgery and anesthesia, many of which are extremely unlikely to occur, but can be alarming for the patient. Please feel free to the doctor
about the frequency of any risks or complications disclosed herein that might apply to you based on our clinical experience and that of
other oral surgeons and implantologists.
1. After a careful oral examination and study of my dental condition, the doctor has advised me that my missing tooth or teeth may be
replaced with artificial teeth supported by an implant. I hereby authorize and direct the doctor and his authorized associates and
assistants to treat my condition.
2. The procedure I choose to treat this condition is understood by me to be the placement of root form implant(s). Additional treatment
procedures may include a bone graft including materials of human, animal or plant origin. I understand that the purpose of this procedure
is to allow me to have more functional artificial teeth by the implants providing support, anchorage and retention for these teeth.
3.1 understand that this is nonetheless an elective procedure, that such procedures are performed to improve function and that an
alternative option, although less desirable, is to not undergo surgery and do nothing. I have also been advised that other alternative
treatments done for patients in my condition include, but are not limited to, a bridge, a partial denture, full denture, or other options. I
understand and choose to undergo the placement of root form implant(s).
4.1 understand that my gum tissue will surgically be opened to expose the bone and that implants will be placed immediately by tapping
or threading them into holes that have been drilled into my jaw bone. I understand that the gum tissue will then be stitched closed over or
around the implant to permit healing for a period of 3 to 6 months. I understand that dentures usually cannot be worn during the first few
weeks of the healing phase. I understand that the implants placed will be integrated in 3 to 9 months time, depending on my personal
healing ability.
5.1 also understand that during the course of the procedure, unforeseen conditions may arise that necessitate an extension or alteration
of the planned procedure contained herein. I therefore authorize and request that the doctor and his associates or assistants under his
direction perform such procedure as found necessary and administer such drugs and treatments as required in their professionaJ
judgment.
6.1 have had the opportunity to discuss with the doctor the planned surgical procedure, implant placement, and my postoperative
responsibilities. I understand that following the procedure during the healing process I should not smoke, drink heavily, use any drugs not
prescribed by my doctor, should not blow my nose for at least two weeks and thereafter not heavily blow my nose for an additional two
weeks. I should take any antibiotics prescribed and use pain medication as needed. If I experience an unusual amount of pain I should
contact the doctor or his associates immediately, as it may signify a problem.
7.1 understand that anesthesia given during surgery and certain prescription medications used after surgery cause drowsiness and
impaired physical performance, and that such effect is increased by the use of alcohol, and that I must not operate a motor vehicle or any
other hazardous equipment while taking these drugs. Further, I agree not to operate a motor vehicle or any other hazardous equipment
for at least 48 hours after my release from surgery.
8.1 understand no guarantee has been given to me that the proposed treatment will be curative and/or successful to my complete
satisfaction. I also understand that due to individual patient differences and the imperfections of the art and science of surgery, there
- Page 1 of 4 ImplantVision Communications LLC

exists a risk of failure or necessity of additional treatment despite appropriate care. I have been advised that the placement of root form
implants has shown long term success rates. However, I understand that such disclosure is not to imply that I personally can expect such
a favorable lohg-term result and that there will be no refund of fees from the surgeon or restorative dentist in the event of complications
requiring additional surgery to salvage the implant or failure requiring removal of part or all of the implant. I further understand that should
removal be required, the doctor will remove the Implant at no additional cost. However, should 1 elect to have another doctor remove the
implant, 1 am solely responsible for all costs and fees incurred in doing so and hereby release the doctor from any such costs and fees
imposed by the other doctor.

Alternatives
My physician fas explained the following medically acceptable alternatives to be; A bridge, a partial denture, full denture, or other
options.
Also, I can seek specialized care somewhere else, or I can have nothing done.

Consequences of not having procedure
If I don't have the procedure, my condition may stay the same or even improve. However, it is the doctor's opinion that the proposed
procedure is a better option for me. Ifl don't have the procedure, the following may also happen; Further loss of supporting tissues or bone, A gap
in the teeth.

Other procedures
During the course of the procedure, the doctor may discover other conditions that require an extension of the planned procedure, or a different
procedure altogether. I request the doctor to do the procedures my doctor thinks are better to do at this sitting rather than later on,

Risks
The doctor will [give his best professional care toward accomplishment of the desired results, The substantial and frequent risks and
hazards of the proposed procedure are; Restricted mouth opening; gum shrinkage; clicking or pain of the temporomandibular joints (jaw
joints) tooth sensitivity to hot or cold for days up to months;.loose teeth; food lodging between the teeth requiring flossing for removal; and
unesthetic exposure of crown margins of teeth in the surgery area These are usually temporary. Uncommonly, these effects may persist,
Uncommon risks also include; Interference with speech sounds; permanent nerve injury possibly requiring nerve graft surgery.
There will be no refund of fees from the surgeon or restorative dentist in the event of complications requiring additional surgery to salvage
the implant or failure requiring removal of part or all of the implant, Should removal be required, the doctor will remove the implant at no
additional cost! If I have someone else remove the implant, I am responsible for all costs and fees and will not ask the doctor to pay for it,

Drugs, Medications, and Anesthesia
Antibiotics, pain medication, and other medications may cause adverse reactions such as redness and swelling of tissues, pain, itching,
drowsiness, nausea, vomiting, dizziness, lack of coordination, miscarriage, cardiac arrest, which can be increased by the effect of alcohol
or other drugs, blood clot in the legs, heart, lungs or brain, low blood pressure, heart attack, stroke, paralysis, brain damage. Sometimes
after injection of a local anesthetic, I may have prolonged numbness and/or irritation in the area of injection. If I use Nitrous Oxide, Atarax,
Chloral hydrate^ Xanax, or other sedative, possible risks include, but are not limited to, passing out, severe shock, and stopping breathing
or heartbeat I vyill arrange for someone to drive me home from the office after I have received sedation, and to have someone watch me
closely for 10 hours after my dental appointment to observe for side effects such as difficulty breathing or passing out.

Implant Database
If a device is placed in my body, the doctor may give my name, dental information, social security number and other personal information
to the device manufacturer for quality control purposes.

No guarantee
The practice of dentistry and surgery is not an exact science. Although good results are expected, the doctor has not given me any
guarantee that the proposed treatment will be successful, will be to my complete satisfaction, or that it will last for any specific length of
time. Due to individual patient differences, there is always a risk of failure, relapse, need for more treatment, or worsening of my present
condition despite careful treatment. Occasionally, treated teeth may require extraction.

Parts- My Responsibility
agree to cooperate completely with the doctor's recommendations while under his/her care. If I don't fulfill my responsibility, my results
could be affected.
.
-Page 2 of 4ImplantVision Communications LLC

Success requires my long-term personal oral hygiene, mechanical plaque removal (daily brushing and flossing), completion of
recommended dental therapy, periodic periodontal visits (dental clinic care), regular follow-up appointments and overall general health.
There may be several follow-up clinical visits for the first year following surgery. It is my responsibility to see the doctor at least once a
year for evaluation of implant performance and oral hygiene maintenance.
I have provided as accurate and complete medical and personal history as possible, including those antibiotics, drugs, medications, and
foods to which I am allergic. I will follow any and all instructions as explained and directed to me, and permit all required diagnostic
procedures. I have had an opportunity to discuss my past medical and health history including any serious problems and/or injury with the
doctor.
Necessary Follow-up Care and Self-Care. Natural teeth and appliances should be maintained daily in a clean, hygienic manner. I
should follow post-operative instructions given after surgery to ensure proper healing. I will need to come for appointments following the
procedure so that my healing may be monitored and so that my doctor can evaluate and report on the outcome of the surgery upon
completion of healing.
I will not drink alcohol or take non-prescribed drugs during the treatment period. If sedation or general anesthesia is used I will not to
operate a motor vehicle or hazardous device for at least 24 hours or more until full recovered from the effects of the anesthesia or drugs.
/ will let the doctor's office know if I change my address so I can be contacted for any recalls.

Part 4- Miscellaneous
Photography
I give permission for persons other than the doctors involved on my care and treatment to observe this operation (such as company
representatives and dentists who are learning the procedure) and I consent to photography, filming, recording and x-rays of my oral and
facial structures and the procedure, and their publication for educational and scientific purposes, provided my identity is not revealed. I
give up all rights for compensation for publication of these records.

Miscellaneous
If teeth are removed during treatment, they may be retained for training purposes and then disposed of sensitively.

Fees
/ know the fee that I am to be charged. I am satisfied with it and know that it does not include additional post-operative x-rays, injections
or anesthetics that may later be necessary to correct any complications. As a courtesy to me, the office staff will help prepare and file
insurance c/a/ms should I be insured. However, the agreement of the insurance company to pay for medical expenses is a contract
between myself and the insurance company and does not relieve my responsibility to pay for services provided. Some and perhaps all of
the services provided may not be covered or not considered reasonable and customary by my insurance company. I am responsible for
paying all co-pays and deductibles at the time services are rendered and all costs that have not been paid for by my insurance within 45
days. Otherwise, all payments are due at the time services are rendered. All accounts not paid in full within 90 days shall accrue interest
at the rate of 18% per year. I will be liable for all collection costs, including court costs and attorney fees.

- Page 3 of 4 ImplantVis/on Communications LLC

Parts- Signature
Understanding
I read and write English, 1 have read and understand this form. AH blanks or statements requiring insertion or completion were filled in
and inapplicable paragraphs, if any, were stricken before I signed.
I have been encouraged to ask questions, and am satisfied with the answers. I have read this entire form. I give my informed consent for
surgery and anesthesia.
Someone at the doctor's office has explained this form, my condition, the procedure, how the procedure could help me, things
that can go wrong, and my other options, including not having anything done. I want to have the procedure done.
I authorize Drj _
_ or his designee (referred to in the rest of this form as the doctor) to perform
the procedure; listed in the title above.
I know that I ^m free to withdraw from treatment at any time.

Patient or Representative Signature

Date

If not the patidnt, what is your relationship to the patient?
I
I have explained the condition, procedure, benefits, alternatives, and risks described on this form to the patient or representative.

Dentist Signature

Date

- Page 4 of 4 -

ImpIantVision Communications LLC

