 

Benzie-Leelanau District Health Department Immunization consent

 

 

 

 

 

 

School Based Immunization Clinic Form
Student Name: Date of Birth:
Last First Middle
Address:
StreethO Box City Zip
Parent/Guardian Name: Phone Number:
Insurance Information: My child does not have insurance (ordoesn'thave insurance thatcovers immunizations)

Insurance Company:

 

Insured Name: Date of Birth:

 

 

Policy |D# Group #

 

 

Employer Name:

 

Please answer the following questions:

 

YES NO DON'T
KNOW

 

Does this person have allergies to medications, food, latex or a vaccine component?

 

Has this person had a serious reaction to a vaccine in the past?

 

Has this person, a sibling, or a parent had a seizure; or does this person have brain or other
nervous system problems?

 

Does this person have cancer, leukemia, HIV/AIDS, or any other immune system problem?

 

In the past 1-3 months, has this person taken medications that affect the immune system such
as prednisone, other steroids, or anticancer drugs; drugs for the treatment of rheumatoid
arthritis, Crohn's disease, or psoriasis; or had radiation treatment?

 

In the past year, has this person received a transfusion of blood or blood products, or been
given immune (gamma) globulin or an antiviral drug?

 

Is this person pregnant or is there a chance she could beoome pregnant in the next month?

 

 

 

 

 

Has this person received vaccinations in the past 4 wee ks?

 

| request immunizations be given to the student named above, for whom I am authorized to make this request,
by Benzie-Leelanau District Health Department staff, at the School Based Immunization Clinic. I have had a
chance to review Vaccine Information Sheets and have had my questions answered to my satisfaction. I am
aware that this information may be shared with my physician and with local and state immunization registries,
and for payment purposes, with my insurance carrier.

Ifl have provided medical insurance information, I give consent to bill my insurance for vaccines administered.
Iconsent for my child to be immunized forthe following:

DAII recommended vaccines
DAII recommended vaccines EXCEPT

 

Parent/Guardian Signature: Date:

 

 

