INFORMATIONAL PURPOSES ONLY

CONSENT FOR ENDODONTIC TREATMENT

I understand root canal treatment is a procedure to retain a tooth which may otherwise require extraction. Although root

canal therapy has a very high degree of clinical success, it is still a biological procedure, so it cannot be guaranteed.
I, the undersigned, have been informed of the alternatives to root canal treatment, including no treatment at all, I understand
that if no treatment is provided I may experience:
1.

The loss of the tooth;

2.

Bone destruction due to an abscess.

3.

Possible systemic (affecting the whole body) infection.

I also understand that if I choose to have root canal treatment for tooth no.

_
___

1.

A certain percentage (5-10%) of root canals fail, and they may require re-treatment, periapical surgery, or even

2.

During instrumentation of the tooth, an instrument may separate and lodge permanently in the tooth, or an

extraction.
instrument may perforate the root wall. Although this rarely occurs, such an event could cause the failure of the root
canal and the loss of the tooth.
3.

A root can crack or split which may affect the outcome of the root canal therapy

4.

When making an access (opening) through an existing crown or placing a rubber dam clamp, damage could occur and

5.

Successful completion of the root canal procedure does not prevent future decay or fracture.

a new crown would be necessary after endodontic therapy.
6.

Temporary fillings are usually placed in the tooth immediately after the root canal treatment. Teeth which have had
root canal treatment will require a permanent (outside) restoration. This may involve a filling or more extensive
restorative work (pins, post, crown buildup, crown) depending on the clinical status of the tooth.

There are risks involved in administration of anesthetics, analgesics (pain medication) and antibiotics. I will inform the doctor
of any previous side-affects of allergies from any medication.
Note: Antibiotics may decrease tlte effectiveness of birtlt control medication. Additional metltods of birtlt co11trol sltoultl be used
wltile 011 a11tibotics.
I agree that I have read, had explained to me and understand this consent for endodontic treatment. I have been given the
opportunity to ask questions concerning the treatment, the risks of treatment and the alternatives to treatment. After fully
considering this information, I hereby consent to endodontic treatment set forth above.

Date

Patient or Patient's Guardian

Date

Signature of Witness

