INFORMATIONAL PURPOSES ONLY

ROOTCANALRETREATMENT
I UNDERSTAND THAT ROOT CANAL RETREATMENT includes possible inherent risks such ns, but not limited to the
following, including the understnnding thnt no promises or gunrnntees of successful results hnve been mnde.

1.

A tooth which hns hnd root cnnal treatment previously may possibly become excessively tender or painful at some time following the
initial root cmial treatment for various reasons. Should this occur the tooth may require additional procedures, including rctreatment, apical
surgery, or extraction.

2.

Should anesthesia be necessary there is a possibility of numbness occun'ing in the tongue, lips, teeth, jaws and/or facial tissues resulting
from either the anesthetic administration or treatment procedures. Numbness is usually temporary but may be pennanent.

3.

Extensive complicated treatment may be necessary. When retreatment is necessary, the removal of the previous root canal filling
material may involve difficulties such as pulp chamber or root perforation, root fracture, or other complications. This may possibly
necessitate referral to a specialist or may even require extraction of the tooth.

4.

Instrument separntion may occur. Because of the small diameter and fragility of root canal instruments, there is a possibility of an
instrument separating. Many.times the separated part of the instrument can be removed or even retained without causing problems. No
matter how carefully instruments are manipulated the possibility of separation exists.

5.

A previously root cannl treated tooth mny subsequently become infected. Should this occur, it may be difficult to control the infection
with retrcatment only of the root canal and/or administration of antibiotics. TI1c tooth may require a procedure called an apicoectomy that
entails surgical removal of the end of the root and placement of filling material. In most instances, this treatment will take care of the
problem. However, at times this procedure may not produce the desired result and preservation of the tooth.

6.

A retreated tooth may become brittle. Because of the loss of vital tissue in the pulp chamber and root canal, a tooth may become
excessively brittle and break (fracture). At times, this could occur subsequent to retreatment. In such cases, the tooth may be preserved with
a crown buildup and a crown to restore the tooth unless the fracture is too severe or too extensive. Should the fracture be too extensive for
a crown buildup or extend below the level of supporting bone, the tooth may need extraction.

7.

Should extrnction be required, replacement could be made with some type of prosthesis such as a fixed bridge, a removable bridge, or an
implant.

8.

Alternatives to root canal retreatment. Should it be determined to not retreat a tooth previously treated with a root canal procedure,
alternatives such as extraction followed by fixed or removable bridgework, or implants may be considered.

9.

Medications. Should infection and/or pain be present, it may be necessary to prescribe medication. Drugs prescribed must be taken strictly
according to instructions. Patients on oral contraception must be aware that antibiotics may render these contraceptives ineffective. Other
methods of contraception should be utilized during the treatment period if antibiotics are used.

I 0.

TREATMENT MUST BE COMPLETED. It is absolutely necessury to complete the root canal rctrcatment procedure once it is begun,
otherwise serious problems may develop. It is the patient's responsibility to schedule and keep the necessary appointments and also to
notify this office should unanticipated problems occur concerning the treatment. Also, the patient must diligently follow all preoperative
and postoperative instructions and keep all scheduled appointments.

INFORMED CONSENT: I have been given the opportunity to ask any questions regarding the nature and purpose of root canal retreutmcnt and
have received answers to my satisfaction. I have been given the option of seeking this treatment from a specialist. I do voluntarily assume any and all
possible risks including, but not limited to, those listed above, including risk of substantial hann, if any, which may be associated with any phase of
this treatment in hopes of obtaining the desired potential results, which may or may not be achieved. No promises or guarantees have been made to
me concerning the results. The fee(s) for this service have been explained to me and are satisfactory. By signing this document, I um freely giving my
consent to allow and authorize Dr.

and/or his/her associates or agents to render any treatment necessary and/or

advisable to my dental condition(s), including prescribing and administering any and all anesthetics and/or medications.

Patient's Name (please print)

Signature of patient, legal guardian, or

Date

authorized representative
Tooth No.(s)

_____
_

Witness signature

Date

