INFORMATIONAL PURPOSES ONLY

PERIODONTAL PROCEDURES
SCALING AND ROOT PLANING
I UNDERSTAND that PERIODONTAL PROCEDURES (treatment involving the gum tissues and other tissues supporting the
teeth) include risks and possible unsuccessful results from such treatment. Even though the utmost care and diligence is
exercised in the treatment of periodontal disease and associated conditions through scaling and root planing and related
procedures, there are no promises or guarantees as to anticipated results. I agree to assume those risks and possible
unsuccessful results associated with, but not limited to, the following:
1.

Response to treatment: Because of many variables within each patient's physiological make-up, it is impossible to precisely dctcnninc
whether or not the healing process, in which tissue response is a vital element, will achieve the results desired by both
Dr.

2.

and the patient. Should the desired results not be attained, extractions may be required.

Postoperative patient responsibility for care: With the types of treatment required in correcting periodontal problems, it is mandatory
that the patient exercise extreme diligence in performing the home care required after treatment, as instructed by the treating dentist.
Without the necessary follow-up care by the patient, the probability of unsatisfactory results is greatly increased.

3.

Pain, soreness and sensitivity: ll1erc may be post-operative discomfort which may be transitory or pemmnent, related to hot and cold
stimuli, contact with teeth, and sweet and sour foods. ll1e gums will also be sore immediately following treatment.

4.

Bleeding during or after treatment: Laceration or tearing of the gums may occur which might require suturing. ll1e gums may bleed as
well during or after treatment.

5.

Recession of the gums after treatment: After healing occurs, there may be gum recession which exposes the margin or edge of crowns or
fillings, increases sensitivity of teeth, creates esthetic or cosmetic changes in front teeth which results in longer teeth and wider
intcrproximal spaces visible as a black triangle. These wider interproxirnal spaces are more likely to trap food.

6.

Broken curettes, scalers or other instruments, and post-treatment infection: It may be necessary to retrieve broken instruments
surgically. Post treatment infection may also result from calculus being lodged in the tissue which may also require surgical intervention.

7.
8.

Increased mobility (looseness) of the teeth during the healing period.
Noise and water spray: Ultrasonic instrumentation is noisy and the water used may cause cold sensitivity during treatment on
unanesthctized teeth not in the treatment field.

9.

Post-treatment complications: Cracking or stretching of the lips/comers of the mouth during treatment is possible. ll1ere is the possibility
that additional surgical treatment may be necessary after root planing.

10.

Sequela of local drug delivery: If tetracycline fiber is used, there muy be premature loss of the fibers necessitating u return visit to the

dental office for replacement. There may be soreness or pain in the treated areas. The patient will be aware of the adhesive sealer, which often bus
granular surface. The sealer bus un opaque or milky appearance und may be visible. ll1ere will be a need for a post-op visit to remove the fibers seven
to ten days after placement. ll1ere may be an adverse reaction to the antibiotic in the fiber whether a re-existing, known allergy exists or not.
INFORMED CONSENT: I have been given the opportunity to ask any questions regarding the nature and purpose of periodontal treatment und
have received answers to my satisfaction. I do voluntarily assume uny and all possible risks, including the risk of substantial hann, if any, which may
be associated with any phase of this treatment in hopes of obtaining the desired results, which may or may not be achieved. No promises or
guamntees have been made to me concerning my recovery and results of the treatment. ll1e fee(s) for this service have been explained to me and are
satisfactory. By signing this fonn, I am freely giving my consent to allow and authorize Dr.

and/or his/her associates

to render any treatment necessary or advisable to my dental conditions, including any and all anesthetics and/or medications.

Patient's name (please print)

Signature of putient, legal guardian

Date

or authorized representative
Witness to signature

Date

(lkv.

L0!'.!9197)

