,-

INFORMATIONAL PURPOSES ONLY

STATEMENT OF CONSENT FOR AMALGAM REPLACEMENT PROCEDURES
1.

I hereby authorize Dr.

and/or other dentists or assistants as may be selected by

him/her to treat my condition(s). The procedure(s) necessary to treat the condition(s) have been explained to me
and I understand the nature of the procedure as follows:

..........................................

2.

I have been informed of my current dental diagnosis and of possible alternative methods of treatment (if any).

3.

I further understand that this is an elective procedure that other forms of treatment or no treatment at all are

4.

I understand that replacement of dental amalgam in a non-allergic patient does not indicate that the doctor is of

.

choice that I have, and I have discussed the known risks of these other fom1s of treatment with my dentist.
the opinion that amalgam is a health hazard.
5.

The doctor has explained to me that there are certain inherent and potential risks in ANY treatment plan or
procedure. We no not expect these to occur, but there is that possibility. In this specific instance such risks
include, but are not limited to, the following:
A.

Nerve inflammation leading to hot and cold sensitivity

B.

The need for endodontic therapy (root canal treatment)

C.

Cracked cusps

D.

A shorter length of serviceability of the restoration with the need for more frequent replacement

E.

In cases where the previous restorations (fillings) are very large, the use of cast or full coverage crowns,
or bonded porcelain are suggested

6.

It has been explained to me that, during the course of the procedure(s), unforseen conditions may be revealed that
necessitate and extension of the original procedures or different procedures(s) than those set forth in paragraph 1
above. I, therefore, authorize and request that the persons described in paragraph 1 above perform such
procedures as are necessary and desirable in the exercise of professional judgment. The authority granted under
this paragraph 6 shall extend to the treatment of all conditions that require treatment and are not known at the
time the original procedure is commenced.

7.

I consent to the administration of anesthesia, including local, intravenous and/or general anesthesia in connection

with the procedure(s) referred to above, by any of the persons described in paragraph 1, and to the use of such
anesthetics as may be advisable with the exception of:

to which I said I was

allergic. I recognize that there are always risks to life and health associated with anesthesia and such risks have
been explained to me.
8.

Medications, drugs, anesthetics and prescriptions may cause drowsiness and lack of awareness and coordination,
which can be increased by the use of alcohol or other drugs; thus, I have been advised not to operate any vehicle,
automobile, or hazardous devices, or work, while taking such medications and/or drugs; or until fully recovered
from the effects of the same. I understand and agree not to operate any vehicle or hazardous device until I have
recovered from the effects of the anesthetic medication and drugs that I may have been given in the office for my
care.

9.

It has been explained to me, and I understand, that a perfect result is not guaranteed or warranted and cannot be
guaranteed or warranted.

I 0.

I agree to cooperate completely with the recommendations of the doctor while I am under his/her care, realizing
any lack of same could result in a less than optimum result and that failure to follow the doctor's suggestions and
directions could be even life threatening.

11.

I have been given ample opportunity to ask questions and any questions I have asked have been answered in a
satisfying manner.

12.

I certify that I read and write English and fully understand this consent. PLEASE ASK THE DOCTOR IF YOU
HAVE ANY QUESTIONS CONCERNING THIS CONSENT FORM BEFORE SIGNING IT.

Signature

Date

Witness

Date

Dentist

Date

