INFORMATIONAL PURPOSES ONLY

CROWN AND BRIDGE PROSTHETICS
I UNDERSTAND that treatment of dental conditions requiring CROWNS and/or FIXED BRIDGEWORK includes certain
risks and possible unsuccessful results, with even the possibility of failure. I agree to assume those risks, possible unsuccessful
results and/or failure associated with, but not limited to the following: (Even though care and diligence is exercised in the
treatment of conditions requiring crowns and bridgework and fabrication of same, there are no promises or guarantees of
anticipated results or the longevity of the treatment).
I.

Reduction of tooth structure: In order to replace decayed or otherwise traumatized teeth it is necessary to modify the existing tooth or
teeth so that crowns (caps) and/or bridges may be placed upon them. Tooth preparation will be done as conservatively as practical. In
preparation of teeth, anesthetics are usually needed. At times there may be swelling, jaw muscle tenderness or even a resultant numbness of
the tongue, lips, teeth, jaws and/or facial tissues which is usually temporary, or, rarely, pcnnancnt.

2.

Sensitivity of teeth: Often, after the preparation of teeth for the reception of either crowns or bridges, the teeth may exhibit sensitivity. It
may be mild to severe. This sensitivity may last only for a short period of time or may last for much longer periods. If it is persistent, notify
us inasmuch as this sensitivity may be from some other source.

3.

Crowned or bridge abutment teeth may require root canal treatment: Teeth after being crowned may develop a condition known as
pulpitis or pulpal degeneration. The tooth or teeth may have been traumatized fi-om an accident, deep decay, extensive preparation, or other
causes. It is often necessary to do root canal treatments in these teeth. If teeth remain too sensitive for long periods of time following
crowning, root canal treatment may be necessary. lnfi-cqucntly, the tooth (teeth) may abscess or otherwise not heal which may require root
canal treatment, root surgery, or possibly extraction.

4.

Breakage: Crowns and bridges may possibly chip or break. Many factors could contribute to this situation such as chewing excessively
hard materials, changes in biting forces, traumatic blows to the mouth, etc. Unobservable cracks may develop in crowns fi-om these causes,
but the crowns/bridges may not actually break until chewing soft foods or possibly for no apparent reason. Breakage or chipping seldom
occurs due to defective materials or construction unless it occurs soon after placement.

5.

Uncomfortable or strange feeling: This may occur because of the differences bet\veen natural teeth and the artificial replacements. Most
patients usually become accustomed to this feeling in time. In limited situations, muscle soreness or tenderness of the jaw joints (TMJ) may
persist for indctcnninable periods of time following placement of the prosthesis.

6.

Esthetics or appearance: Patients will be given the opportunity to observe the appearance of crowns or bridges in place prior to final
cementation. When satisfactory, this fact is acknowledged by an entry into the patient's chart initialed by patient.

7.

Longevity of crowns and bridges: There arc many variables that detennine "how long" crowns and bridges can be expected to last.
Among these are some of the factors mentioned in preceding paragraphs. Additionally, general health, good oral hygiene, regular dental
checkups, diet, etc., can affect longevity. Because of this, no guarantees can be made or assumed to be made.

8.

It Is a patient's responsibility to seek attention from the dentist should any undue or unexpected problems occur. The patient must
diligently follow any and all instructions, including the scheduling and attending all appointments. Failure to keep the cementation
appointment can result in ultimate failure of the crown/bridge to fit properly and an additional fee may be assessed.

INFORM ED CONSENT: I have been given the opportunity to ask any questions regarding the nature and purpose of crown and/or bridge
treatment and have received answers to my satisfaction. I voluntarily assume any and all possible risks including those as listed above and including
risk of substantial harm, if any, which may be associated with any phase of this treatment in hopes of obtaining the desired results, which may or may
not be achieved. No guarantees or promises have been made to me concerning the results. The fee(s) for service have been explained to me and are
satisfactory. By signing this document, I am freely giving my consent to allow and authorize Dr.
and/or
his /her associates to render any treatment necessary and/or advisable to my dental conditions including the prescribing and administering any
medications and/or anesthetics deemed necessary to my treatment.

Patient's name (please print)

Signature of patient, legal guardian
or authorized representative

Date

Witness to signature

Date

Tooth No.(s)
(Rev.

1219/96)

