INFORMATIONAL PURPOSES ONLY
FULL ARTIFICIAL DENTURES AND PARTIAL DENTURES

I UNDERSTAND that REMOVABLE PROSTHETIC APPLIANCES (PARTIAL DENTURES and FULL ARTIFICIAL
DENTURES) include risks and possible failures associated with such dental treatment. I agree to assume those risks and
possible failures associated with but not limited to the following: (Even though the utmost care and diligence is exercised in
preparation for and fabrication of prosthetic appliances, there is the possibility of failure with patients not adapting to them)
I.

( 1) gum tissues which cannot bear the
(2) jaw ridges which may not provide adequate support and/or

Failure of full dentures: There are many variables which may contribute to this possibility such as:
pressures placed upon them resulting in excessive tenderness and sore spots;
retention;

(3) musculature in the tongue, floor of the mouth, cheeks, etc., which may not adapt to and be able to accommodate the artificial
(4) excessive gagging reflexes; (5) excessive saliva or excessive dryness of mouth; (6) general psychological and/or physical

appliances;

problems interfering with success.
2.

Failure of partial dentures: Many variables may contribute to unsuccessful utilizing of partial dentures (removable bridges). The
variables may include those problems related to failure of full dentures, in addition to: ( I) natural teeth to which partial dentures are
anchored (called abutment teeth) may become tender, sore, and/or mobile;
attachments;

3.

(2) abutment teeth may decay or erode around the clasps or

(3) tissues supporting the abutment teeth may foil.

Breakage: Due to the types of materials which arc necessary in the construction of these appliances, breakage may occur even though the

( 1) chewing on foods or objects which are excessively
(2) gum tissue shrinkage which causes excessive pressures to be exerted unevenly on the dentures; (3) cracks which may be
unnoticeable and which occurred previously from causes such as those mentioned in ( I ) and (2); or the dentures having been dropped or
materials used were not defective. Factors which may contribute to breakage arc:
hard;

damaged previously. TI1e above may also cause extensive denture tooth wear or chipping.

4.

Loose dentures: Full dentures nonnally become looser when there arc changes in the supporting gum tissues. Dentures themselves do not
change unless subjected to extreme heat or dryness. When dentures become "loose", relining the dentures may be necessary. Normally, it is
necessary to charge for relining dentures. Partial dentures become loose for the listed reasons in addition to clasps or other attachments
loosening. Sometimes dentures feel loose for other reasons (Sec paragraph I.).

5.

Allergies to denture materials: Infrequently, the oral tissues may exhibit allergic symptoms to the materials used in construction of either
partial dentures or full dentures over which we have no control.

6.

Failure of supporting teeth and/or soft tissues. Natural teeth supporting partials may fail due to decay; excessive trauma; gum tissue or
bony tissue problems. TI1is may necessitate extraction. The supporting soft tissues may fail due to many problems including poor dental or
general health.

7.

It is the patient's responsibility to seek attention when problems occur and do not lessen in a reasonable amount of time; also, to be
examined regularly to evaluate the dentures, condition of the gums, and the patient's oral health.

INFORM ED CONSENT: I have been given the opportunity to ask any questions regarding the nature and purpose of artificial dentures and have
received answers to my satisfaction. I do voluntarily assume any and all possible problems and risks, including risk of substantial hann, if any, which
may be associated with any phase of this treatment in hopes of obtaining the desired potential results, which may or may not be achieved. No
guarantees or promises have been made to me concerning the results relating to my ability to utilize artificial dentures successfully nor to their
longevity. TI1e fee(s) for this service have been explained to me and arc satisfactory. By signing this fom1, I freely give my consent to allow and
authorize Dr.

to render the dental treatment necessary or advisable to my dental condition(s), including

administering and prescribing all anesthetics and/or medications.

Patient's name (please print)

Signature of patient, legal guardian

Date

or authorized representative

Witness to signature

Date

(Rev. 111196)

