INFORMATIONAL PURPOSES ONLY

POSTS AND RETENTION PINS

THE PURPOSE and NECESSITY for placing POSTS and/or RETENTION PINS in teeth occurs when there is so little natural
tooth structure remaining that with usual dental treatment procedures it would not be possible to preserve the tooth in either a
vital or non-vital state. It then becomes necessary to place either pins or posts into the remaining tooth structure to form a
substructure .onto which a large filling or crown may be placed to restore and preserve the tooth. This type of treatment may
help avoid extracting the remaining tooth structure together with its roots and possibly avert artificial replacement.
I UNDERSTAND that the placement of POSTS and/or RETENTION PINS which are often necessary to be placed when there
is inadequate tooth structure remaining to support restoration of a particular tooth or teeth may include possible inherent risks
such as but not limited to the following, including no promises or guarantees as to the desired results which may or may not be
achieved:
Root canal treatment: Even though the tooth is badly broken down, the nerve tissue may still be vital and it is best in most cases to

1.

maintain the tooth in a vital state rather than remove the vital nerve tissue. Because of the lack of tooth structure, in many cases, pins can be
placed in the remaining tooth structure to support the restoration of the tooth. However, at times these pins may impinge on the remaining
nerve tissue and cause it to degenerate, requiring nerve removal and root canal treatment.
Crown or root fracture: At times, particularly when a tooth has been endodontically treated (having bad root canal treatment), the

2.

remaining tooth or root structure may have become brittle due to undermined or reduced tooth structure. When inserting either pins or posts
necessary for retention of a large filling or crown, fracturing or splitting may occur, which in most cases will necessitate extraction of the
tooth, making replacement with a bridge or implant necessary.
Perforation: When posts or pins are inserted, there is the possibility of perforating a root of the tooth, or, in some cases, the pulp chamber.

3.

Should this occur, it is possible in some cases to repair the perforation which may require being referred to a specialist. However, if this is
not possible it may be necessary to extract the tooth and replace it with a bridge or implant. if a bridge abutment or crowned tooth requires
post placement, the chance for perforation is increased due to obscured anatomy.
Numbness: There is the possibility of injury to the nerves of the face or tissues of the oral cavity during the administration of anesthetics or

4.

during treatment procedures which may cause a numbness of lips, tongue, tissues of the mouth, and/or facial tissues. This numbness is
usually temporary, but, rarely, may be pennanent.
Looseness or breakage: There may be the possibility of the pins or posts becoming loose or even breaking which could cause the

5.

restoration to dislodge. This occurrence could be the result of chewing excessively hard materials, changes in biting forces, traumatic blows
to the mouth, etc. The dislodging of the restoration may have appeared to occur when chewing something soft, or for no apparent reason,
whereas the loosening or breaking of the pins or posts actually took place earlier for the above reasons.
Tenderness, soreness or sensitivity: These arc all possibilities when teeth arc required to be treated with pins or posts. Should any of these

6.

symptoms persist, it is necessary to contact this office for an examination.
I acknowledge that is my responsibility to seek attention should any undue problems occur after treatment. I exit shall diligently

7.

follow any preoperative and postoperative instructions given to me.
INFORMED CONSENT: I have been given the opportunity to ask any questions regarding the nature and purpose of placing pins and/or posts in
teeth and have received answers to my satisfaction. I do voluntarily assume any and all possible risks, including the risk of substantial harm, if any,
which may be associated with any phase of this treatment in hopes of obtaining the desired results, which may or may not be achieved. No guarantees
or promises have been made to me concerning my recovery and results of the treatment to be rendered to me. The rre(s) for this service have been
explained

to

me

and

are

satisfactory.

By

signing

this

form,

I

am

freely

givmg

my

consent

to

the administration and/or prescribing of any and all anesthetics and/or medications.

Patient's name (please print)

Signature of patient, legal guardian

Date

or authorized representative

(Rev.

allow

and

authorize

and! or any associates to render that treatment necessary or advisable to my dental conditions, including

Dr.

Witness to signature
J:?/9/%)

Date

