PATIEN T INFOR MAT ION AND CONSEN T FORM FOR CO SMET IC
DENTISTRY /COSMETIC RECONSTRUCTION
Patient :
Date :
1.

I,

, authorize and request Dr.(s)
,
and/or such assistants as may be
selected by him (them) to provide cosmetic dentistry / cosmetic reconstruction to
address the conditions or symptoms based on the diagnostic studies and/or
evaluations already performed and which have been explained to me :

(Explain nature of conditions, e.g. missing teeth, malposed teeth, irregular alignment,
improper color, excessive wear, missing teeth or inability to wear previous dentures
or patients’ desire to use an implant).
2.

I also authorize and direct my doctor(s), with associates or assistants of his (their)
choice, to provide such additional services as he (they) may deem reasonable and
necessary, including, but not limited to, the administration of anesthetic agents, the
performance of necessary laboratory, radiological (x-ray), and other diagnostic
procedures; and the administration of medicat ions orally, by injection, by infusion, or
by any other dentally accepted route of administration.
If an unforeseen condition arises in the course of treatment which calls for the
performance of procedures in addition to or different from that now contemplated I
further authorize and direct my doctor(s), with associates or assistants of his(their)
choice, to do whatever he (they) deem necessary and advisable under the
circumstances, including the decision not to proceed with the cosmetic treatment.

3.

4.

Alternatives to cosmetic dentistry / cosmetic reconstruction have been explained to
me, including their risks. I have considered these alternatives to treatment and t heir
risks but I request the cosmet ic dentistry/cosmetic reconstruction knowing the
treatment is in part elective and cosmetic and not due to any breakdown of my teeth.
I consent to the tooth reduction or loss of tooth structure necessary to accomplish the
cosmetic requirements I would like to have.

I am aware that the practice of dent istry and cosmetic dent istry/cosmetic reconstruction is not
an exact science and I acknowledge that no guarantees have been made to me concerning the
success of my cosmetic dentistry/cosmetic reconstruction and the associated treatment and

procedures. I am aware that there is a risk that the cosmetic dentistry/cosmetic reconstruction
will require ongoing maintenance care, remaking of crowns, bridges and veneers and the
longevity is directly related to what I eat and drink and my home-care habits.
5.

The cosmetic dentistry/cosmetic reconstruction procedure has been explained to me and I
understand the nature of these procedures and anesthetic to be used as follows:

(Description in layman terms of the specific cosmetic procedure and anesthetic to be used).
6.

As with any dental procedure, there are possible complications of which you must be aware.
These include, but are not limited to: limited oral function; post operative pain; bleeding;
infection or abscess which may require treatment or drainage; t emporary bruising of the face,
allergic reactions to metal and medications; a change in sensation or numbness to the lip, chin,
face and/ or tongue which may be of a temporary or permanent nature; periodontal infection
or condition requiring additional treatment; injury to the teeth; temporomandibular joint (jaw)
problems requiring additional treatment and poor healing which may result in an alteration or
change in the planned treatment. I have also been advised that there is a risk that the crowns,
veneers and bridges may break which could require additional procedures to correct.

7.

I understand that some or all of t he cosmetic dentistry/cosmetic reconstruction is elective and
only done for my cosmetic interest but there are dental conditions that if left untreated, the
following may occur: limited oral function; gum or bone disease, loss of bone; inflammation;
infection; sensitivity; looseness and/or loss of teeth; shifting of teeth with bite changes;
temporomandibular joint (jaw) problems and an inability to have the same treatment, but due
to the changes in the oral conditions or medical conditions, additional and more extensive
treatment will have to be considered.

8.

I have been advised that the use of tobacco, coffee, alcohol or sugar and some prescription
drugs will limit the cosmetic success of the treatment and require additional treatment to
correct the problems. The reasons may include but not only limited to staining, decreased
tissue health, periodontal disease, recurrent decay and fracture of teeth and restorations.
Because there is no way to accurately predict the capabilities of each patient, I agree to follow
my doctor’s home care instructions and to report to my doctor for regular examinations,
professional dental cleaning and maintenance as instructed.

9.

I agree not to operate a motor vehicle or hazardous device for at least
hours or
more until fully recovered from the effects of the anesthesia or drugs given of my care as
selected by my doctor.

10.

I understand I have had an opportunity to ask and have my questions answered. I understand
my insurance may or may not cover dent istry for cosmetic reasons and I am responsible for
all dental treatment regardless o f my insurance plan.

11.

To my knowledge I have given an accurate report of my physical, dental and mental health
history. If I am currently in treatment for any health problems I certify that I have discussed
the proposed treatment with my health care provider and have received his or her consent to
undergo this cosmetic procedure.

12.

I certify that I have read, have had explained to me, and fully understand the foregoing
consent to cosmetic dentistry, drug and anesthetic procedures, and that it is my intention to
have the foregoing carried out as stated. I have been advised of information concerning the
longevity of the cosmetic procedures. However, I have discussed this as well as the nature
of the services and procedures and I consent to the cosmetic dentistry/cosmetic reconstruction
knowing its risks and limitations.

Patient

Date

Witness (if available)

Parent or Guardian (if patient is a minor)
Dated :

Time :

