INFORMATIONAL PURPOSES ONLY

COMPOSITE FILLINGS
I UNDERSTAND that the treatment of my dentition involving the placement of composite resin fillings which may be more
aesthetic in appearance than some of the conventional materials which have been traditionally used, such as silver amalgam or
gold, may entail certain risks. There is also the possibility of failure to achieve the results which may be desired or expected. I
agree to assume those risks which may occur even though care and diligence will be exercised by my treating dentist in rendering
this treatment. These risks include possible unsuccessful results and/or failure which are associated with, but not limited to the
following:
I.

Sensitivity of Teeth: Often after preparation of teeth for the placement of any restoration, the prepared teeth may

exhibit sensitivity. The sensitivity may be mild to severe. The sensitivity may last only for a short period of time or may
last for much longer periods of time. If such sensitivity is persistent or lasts for much extended periods of time, I agree
to notify the dentist inasmuch as this may be a sign of more serious problems.
2.

Risk of Fracture: Inherent in the placement or replacement of any restoration is the possibility of the creation of small

fracture lines in tooth structure. Sometimes these fractures may not be apparent at the time of removal of tooth structure
and/or the previous filling and placement or replacement, but may manifest at a later time.
3.

Necessity for Root Canal Therapy: When fillings are placed or replaced, the preparation of the teeth for fillings often
necessitates the removal of tooth structure adequate to insure that the diseased or otherwise compromised tooth structure
provides sound tooth structure for placement of the restoration. At times, this may lead to exposure or trauma to
underlying pulp tissue. Should the pulp not heal, which often times is exhibited by extreme sensitivity or possible
abscess, root canal treatment or extraction may be required.

4

Injury to the Nerves: There is a possibility of injury to the nerves of the lips, jaws, teeth, tongue, or other oral or facial

tissues from any dental treatment, particularly those involving the administration of local anesthetics. The resulting
numbness which may occur is usually temporary, but in rare instances could be permanent.
5.

Aesthetics or Appearance: Effort will be made to closely approximate the natural tooth color. However, due to the fact
that there are many factors which affect the shades of teeth, it may not be possible to exactly match the tooth coloration.
Also, over a period of time, the composite fillings, because of mouth fluids, different foods eaten, smoking, etc. may
cause the shade to change. The dentist has no control over these factors.

6.

Breakage, dislodgmcnt or bond failure: Due to extreme masticatory pressures or other traumatic forces, it is possible

for composite resin fillings or aesthetic restorations bonded with composite resins to be dislodged or fractured. The
resin-enamel bond may fail, resulting in leakage and recurrent decay. The dentist has no control over these factors.
7.

New Technology and Health Issues: Composite resin technology continues to advance but some materials yield
disappointing results over time and some fillings may have to be replaced by better, improved materials. Some patients
believe that having metal fillings replaced with composite filings will improve their general health. This notion has not
been proven scientifically and there are no promises or guarantees that the removal of silver fillings and the subsequent
replacement with composite fillings will improve, alleviate, or prevent any current or future health condition.

8.

I understand that it is my responsibility to notify this office should any undue or unexpected problems occur or if I

experience any problems relating to the treatment rendered or the services performed.
INFORMED CONSENT: I have been given the opportunity to ask any questions regarding the nature and purpose of

composite fillings and have received answers to may satisfaction. I do voluntarily assume any and all possible risks, including the
risk of substantial hann, if any, which may be associated with any phase of this treatment in hopes of obtaining the desired
and/or any results from the treatment to be rendered to me. The fee(s) for these services have been explained to me and I accept
them as sa6sfactory. By signing this form, I am freely giving my consent to authorize Dr.
and/or all associates involved in rendering any services he/she deems necessary or advisable to treatment of my dental
conditions, including the administration and/or prescribing of any anesthetic agents and/or medications.
-------­

Patient's name (please print)

Signature of patient, legal guardian

Date

Witness to signature

Date

