n'p CRE C Eisglfgzzf.

SBHC Inﬂuenza Vaccine Consent Form 2016-2017

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

STUDENT NAME (Last, First, Middle) STUDENT DATE OF BIRTH STUDENT GENDER

M / F
STUDENT ADDRESS SOCIAL SECURITY #
PARENT/LEGAL GUARDIAN NAME (Last, First Middle) PARENT/GUARDIAN DAYTIME PHONE NUMBER:
STUDENT’S HEALTH CARE PROVIDER (PEDIATRICIAN) Phone number (if available)

 

 

 

Screening for State Vaccine Elig'bilitx (Please circle YES 01' N0 for each question.)
Has your child been vaccinated With the seasonal inﬂuenza vaccine after J uly 1, 2015? YES D NO B

Is your child an American Indian or Alaskan native? YES NO
Does your child have insurance? YES D NO Does your insurance cover vaccines? YES NO

If yes, please list insurance provider, ID number and subscriber’s name and date of birth:

 

 

* * * * * * *Please provide us with a copy of your child’s current insurance card if available" * * * * *

 

 

 

 

 

 

The following questions let us know that your child is eligible for the intranasal vaccine. YES NO
1. Does your child have a serious allergy to eggs, gelatin or antibiotics? D D
2. Does your child have any other serious allergies? Please list: D D
3. Has your child ever had a serious reaction to a previous dose of ﬂu vaccine? D D
4. Has your child ever had Guillain—Barre Syndrome (a type of temporary severe muscle weakness) D D
Within 6 weeks after receiving a ﬂu vaccine?

5. Has your child gotten vaccinated With any vaccine (not just ﬂu) Within the past 30 days? If so, list D B

vaccine and date given:

 

6. Does your child have any of the following: asthma, diabetes (or other type of metabolic disease), or D D
disease of the lungs, heart, kidneys, liver, nerves, 01' blood? If so, specify:

 

8. Does your child have a weak immune system (for example, from HIV, cancer, or medications such as
steroids or those used to treat cancer)?

 

9. Has your child received any blood products in the last year? D D

 

10. Does anyone With Whom your child has close contact have an extremely weakened immune system? B D

 

 

 

 

11. Has your child ever received the ﬂu vaccine before? If so, When?

 

 

CONSENT FOR CHILD’S VACCINATION (check below as appropriate):
I have read or had explained to me the August 7, 2015 Vaccine Information Statement for Inactivated Inﬂuenza Vaccine (the
ﬂu shot). If my child receives the inﬂuenza vaccine from any other source prior to receiving it at school or if any of the above
information changes, I Will notify the school nurse immediately to prevent inappropriate vaccination. I give consent for my
child to be vaccinated against inﬂuenza With the inactivated inﬂuenza vaccination (“the shot”) and for the vaccine
information to be shared With the school nurse and the health care provider listed above. I consent to the use or disclosure of
my protected health information by Capitol Region Education Council (“Practice”) to any person or organization for the
purposes of carrying out treatment, obtaining payment or conducting certain healthcare operations. I understand that
information regarding how Practice Will use and disclose my information can be found in Practice’s Notice of Privacy
Practices. I understand that this consent is effective for as long as Practice maintains my protected health information. By
signing below, I understand and acknowledge that I have read and understand this consent, and I have received Practice’s
Notice of Privacy Practices currently in effect.

D I Wish to be present for the vaccination. The following days and times are best:

 

 

D I do not Wish to be present for the vaccination.

Signature of Parent/Legal Guardian: Date:

 

Print Parent/Legal Guardian Name:

 

