CONLABPROS Rev 04/11

Catawba Valley Medical Center
Hickory, North Carolina

Consent for Induction of Labor with Prostaglandin Products

 

 

Indication:

Your physician/midwife has determined the need to induce labor at this point in your pregnancy. One currently accepted
theory for what may cause the start of labor is the natural release of prostaglandins in the mother’s body. In the event that
this does not happen naturally, it is sometimes necessary to start labor by other means. Reasons for the medical
“induction” of labor may be:

> going too far past due date

> mother’s medical condition such as diabetes or high blood pressure

> baby’s medical condition

Procedure:

The procedure used to medically start labor uses a Prostaglandin product, which is inserted into or near the opening of the
uterus called the cervix. Prostaglandin can be in the form of a gel or a small pill and is used to “ripen” the cervix and
“thin it out”. Treatment includes admission to the hospital, possible use of IV ﬂuids, external fetal monitoring, and the
insertion of the medication. This may be followed by artificial rupture of membranes (also called “breaking the water”).
For some women, using a Prostaglandin product will be enough to start labor and others may need additional treatment,
which may include administration of the IV medication called Pitoein to help start and keep the patient in labor.

Risks:

Sometimes the uterus could contract too strongly and too often which may “stress” the baby and/or the uterus. When this
occurs, a drug called Terbutaline can be given to decrease or stop the contractions. Nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and
muscle aches may occur and can be relieved with medications as needed. { **Se1dom seen, but can occur, are postpartum
hemorrhage, uterine rupture with the need for surgical repair or hysterectomy, amniotic ﬂuid emboli, retained placenta,
shock, and fetal bradycardia (baby’s heaIt rate drops. Maternal or fetal death can occur in rare occasions}

In the event the induction process fails or a complication occurs; the physician/midwife may discuss an alternative method
for your delivery when the beneﬁts for the baby outweigh the risks of continuing the labor process.

Benefits:
Initially Pro staglandin products are used to “soften the cervix” or to start the labor process. It is minimally invasive, often
allowing the patient to eat and be up out of the bed after the procedure.

Consent:

I have read the above information and I agree to the use of a Prostaglandin product to induce my labor.

Patient Date Time
(Spouse or Legal Guardian)

 

Witness Date Time

 

Date Time Physician/Certified N urse Midwife

 

 

 

 

