CONSENT, ACKNOWLEDGEMENT AND AUTHORIZATIONS
I/we, the patient and/or authorized representative(s), choose to receive hospice care from Hospice of the Comforter, and acknowledge, consent and agree to
the following:
Hospice Care and Services
1. It is not the goal of hospice to cure life-limiting illness. The Hospice of the Comforter program provides care to meet the physical, emotional and
spiritual needs of the patient and family. The focus of care is to provide comfort, relief of pain and other symptoms.
2. Hospice services are provided where the patient lives by a team of professionals and volunteers on a scheduled and as-needed basis. The hospice care
team may include physicians, nurses, social workers, counselors, chaplains, hospice aides, volunteers and physical or other therapies. Hospice will provide
medications, equipment and supplies necessary for the palliation of the terminal condition that are included in the established Plan of Care. Additional
levels of care, including inpatient services, continuous care or respite care may be provided when specific guidelines and criteria are met.
3. The hospice team is not intended to take the place of family or caregivers, but rather to provide support in caring for the patient. Patients, families
and caregivers are a part of the hospice team and participate in decisions about care and services provided.
4. Acceptance into the hospice program of care is contingent on physician certification of terminality/eligibility. A patient may be discharged from
hospice care if the patient no longer meets eligibility requirements, moves out of the Hospice of the Comforter service area, or if care cannot be
safely or effectively provided.
5. It is understood that I/we, the patient or authorized representative, may choose to withdraw (revoke) from hospice care at any time. I/we understand
that revocation must be in writing.
Coverage of Services and Authorization for Payment
1. I/we authorize payments to be made directly to Hospice of the Comforter for health insurance or coverage under Medicare, Medicaid and/or other
insurance plans. I understand that I am financially responsible to Hospice of the Comforter for all charges not covered by my health insurance plans.
2. The decision to receive Hospice of the Comforter care and services will not be based on my ability to pay. The coverage for hospice care has been
explained and I have been given the opportunity to discuss financial needs with a Hospice of the Comforter representative to the extent that I desire.
I understand that it is my responsibility to provide accurate information and cooperate in completion of documentation for private insurance,
Medicare, Medicaid or other third party payer to hospice.
Authorization to Obtain/Use/Disclose Patient Health Information (Confidentiality is maintained in accordance with current laws and regulations.)
1. I authorize the use and disclosure of: Diagnostic radiology and lab reports, History & Physical, surgical and pathology reports, serial physician
assessments, physician progress notes, orders and discharge and medication summaries which are pertinent to my admission and continuation of care
from Hospice of the Comforter. This authorization for records will expire 1 year from the date it is signed, but I have the right to revoke this authorization
at any time.
2. Previous Hospital(s)/Facility(ies) at which I received diagnostic testing or care for my hospice diagnosis:
Name of hospital/facility/physician

City/State

/

Date

/

Name of hospital/facility/physician

City/State

/

Date

/

3. I
agree
do NOT agree (check one) that my name, with no other information, may be used in public areas such as a newsletter to
acknowledge a donation made in my honor or memory, or during events that pay tribute to patients and families.
4. I authorize the disclosure of testing/treatment information for
HIV/AIDS
substance abuse
(Initials)
Acknowledgement of Receipt
I have received and understand the information indicated below, and have been given the opportunity to discuss the information to the extent that I desire.
 Hospice of the Comforter Notice of Privacy Practices. This document provides an explanation of the ways in which my health information may be
used or disclosed by Hospice of the Comforter and my rights with respect to my health information.
 Patient and Caregiver Rights and Responsibilities.
 Information on my right to formulate advance directives, including my options and the process for formulating advance directives.
 Information on emergency planning and understanding my responsibilities for planning for hurricanes or other emergency events.
 The Medicare Hospice Benefit (CMS Publication).
 Disposal of Controlled Substances.
 Help Resources and Regulatory Telephone Numbers to report complaints or concerns, including possible abuse or neglect.
 Information about Patient Financial Responsibility. I have received and been given the opportunity to ask questions about hospice care and services,
including what care and services will or will not be provided by Hospice of the Comforter.
(Initials)
/
Signature of patient

/
Date

Authority of legal representative
 HCS
 DPOA

 Legal Proxy

 Court Appointed Guardian


(If patient cannot sign, explain reason)
/
Signature of legal representative

/

Address of legal representative

/

Patient Name

Date

Printed name of legal representative
/
Signature of Hospice of the Comforter representative

Date

Patient #

Printed name/title of Hospice of the Comforter representative
Consent, Acknowledgement and Authorizations Created 6/16/11 Revised 6/10/14

White – HIM (patient record) Yellow – Patient

Page 1 of 1

