SQUIHOX

- V rccmllw: I“ mc-

INFORMED CONSENT AND REQUEST FOR NATUROPATHIC MEDICAL CARE

As a Patient 1 have the right to be informed about my health condition(s) and recommended treatment. This
disclosure is to help me become better informed so that I may make the decision to give, or withhold, my
consent as to whether or not to undergo care with Dr. Tom Matteucci ND, having had the opportunity to
discuss the Potential beneﬁts> risks and hazards involved.

I, hereby request and consent to examination and
treatment with Naturopathic Medicine by Dr. Tom Matteucci, ND, and/ or other licensed doctors of
naturopathic medicine serving as backup for him, hereafter called allied health care Provider. 1 can request
that students and Preceptors not be included in my evaluation and treatment.

I understand that I have the right to ask questions and discuss to my satisfaction with Dr. Tom Matteucci>
ND, and/ or with the allied health care Provider providing backup:

my suspected diagnosis(es) or condition(s)
the nature, Purpose, goals and Potential beneﬁts of the Proposed care
the inherent risks, complications> Potential hazards or side effects of treatment or Procedure

the Probability or likelihood of success

reasonable available alternatives to the Proposed treatment Procedure

Potential consequences if treatment or advice is not followed and/ or nothing is done

I understand that a Naturopathic evaluation and treatment may include, but are not limited to:

0 Physical exam (including general, musculoskeletal, EENT, heart and lung, orthopedic and
neurological assessments)

0 Common diagnostic Procedures (including venipuncture> pap smears> diagnostic imaging, laboratory
evaluation of blood, urine, stool and saliva)

0 Dietary advice and therapeutic nutrition (including use of foods, diet plans, nutritional supplements
and intra—muscular Vitamin injections)

0 Botanical/herbal medicines, (prescribing of various therapeutic substances including plant> mineral,

and animal materials). Substances may be given in the forms of teas, Pills, creams, powders> tinctures

which may contain alcohol, suppositories> tropical creams, Pastes, plasters> washes or other forms

Homeopathic remedies (highly diluted quantities of naturally occurring substances)

Hydrotherapy (use of hot and cold water, may include transcutaneous electrode stimulation)

Counseling (including but not limited to Visualization for improved lifestyle strategies)

Over—the—counter and Prescﬁption medications (including only those medications on the Fonnulary
of Califomia Naturopathic Doctors)

Potential risks: Including but not limited to Pain, discomfort> blisten'ng, minor bruising, discoloration>
infections> bums> itching; loss of consciousness and deep tissue injury from needle insertions, topical
procedures> heat or frictional therapies> hydrotherapies; allergic reaction to Prescribed herbs> supplements,
Prescription medications; aggravation of Pre—eXisting symptoms.

Potential beneﬁts: Including but not limited to restoration of the bod}? s maximal and optimal functioning
capacity, relief of Pain and other symptoms of disease, assistance with injury and disease recovery, and
Prevention of disease or its Progression.

Notice to pregnant women: All female Patients must alert the Provider if they have conﬁrmed or suspect
Pregnancy as some of the therapies Prescﬁbed could Present a risk to the Pregnancy. Labor—stimulating
techniques or any labor—inducing substances will not be used unless the treatment is speciﬁcally for the

SQUIOOX

P(g- rcoolhc :“v‘: IﬂC"

induction of labor and any treatment intended to induce labor requires a signed letter from a primary care
Provider authorizing or recommending such treatment.

Notice to individuals With bleeding disorders, pace makers, and/or cancer: For your safety it is Vital
to alert your Provider, Dr. Tom Matteucci, ND, of these conditions.

Please INITIAL the following:
I understand that Dr. Tom Matteucci> ND, is not licensed to Prescribe any controlled substances.

I understand that Dr. Tom Matteucci> ND can only Prescribe medications on the California
Naturopathic Doctor’ s formulary and will only do so if he believes that they are in the best interest of myself,
the Patient. Appropriate referrals will be Provided to manage my prescriptive medication needs.

I understand the US Food and Drug Administration has not approved nutritional, herbal and
homeop athic substances; however these have been used widely in Europe, China and the USA for many
years.

I understand that Dr. Tom Matteucci> ND is not a Psychologist or psychiatrist. Counseling services
are Provided for the support of improved lifestyle strategies.

I do not expect Dr. Tom Matteucci> ND and/ or any allied health care Provider to be able to anticipate and
explain all of the risks and complications, and I wish to rely on the Provider to exercise all judgment during
the course of the Procedure based on the known facts. I also understand that it is my responsibility to
request that Dr. Matteucci explain therapies and Procedures to my satisfaction. I further acknowledge that no
guarantee of services have been made to me concerning the results intended from any treatment Provided to
me. By signing below I acknowledge that I have been Provided ample opportunity to read this form or that it
has been read to me. I understand all of the above and give my oral and written consent to the evaluation
and treatment. I intend this as a consent form to cover the entire course of treatments for my Present
condition and any future conditions for which I seek treatment.

I have read and understand my heath information Privacy rights as described herein.

 

Patient Name (Please Print. Include Parent/guardian name if Patient is a minor.)

 

Patient Signature (Parent/guardian signature if minor) Date

SQUIOOX

P(g- rcoolhc :“v‘: IﬂC"

YOUR HEALTH INFORMATION PRIVACY RIGHTS

Under the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA), you have certain Privacy
rights concerning your health care infonnation. Under this law your health care Provider generally cannot give
your information to your emPloyer, use or share your information for marketing or advertising PurPoses> or
share Private notes about your mental health counseling sessions without your written consent. As one of
your health care Providers it is our resPonsibility to keeP your information safe and secure. We also need to
make sure that your information is Protected in a way that does not interfere with your health care. It is
imPortant that you understand that your information can be used and shared in the following ways:

0 For your treatment and care coordination. MultiPle health care Providers may be involved in
your treatment directly and indirectly.

0 With your family, friends, relatives, or others that you identify who are involved in your health
care or health care bills.

0 To Protect the Public’s health, such as reporting when the ﬂu is in your area.

0 To make required rePorts to the Police, such as gunshot wounds.

0 Obtain Payment from third Party Payers.

In order to Provide you with service that best meets your Privacy needs, Please tell us how best to contact you

when needed. Please check all that aPPly:

_ Please do not Phone me at home. Use this alternate Phone number:
_ Please do not Phone me at work. Use this alternate Phone number:
_ Please do not leave messages on my answering machine.

_ Please do not contact me by email.

_ Please send mail, including my bills, to this alternate address:

 

 

Other request (Please describe):

 

 

I have read and understand my heath information Privacy rights as described herein.

 

Patient Name (Please Print. Include Parent/guardian name if Patient is a minor.)

 

Patient Signature (Parent/guardian signature if minor) Date

SQUIOOX

“o" rcoolhc m diam:

PAYMENT AG REEMENT
Dear New Patient,

Welcome to Equinox Natural Medicine. We look forward to Providing for your health care needs. We
encourage your questions and ParticiPation in all asPects of your care. Please read and initial the following
statements:

Payment for all services and medicinary items are due in full at the time of the visit. We accePt cash,
checks, Visa and MasterCard. Returned checks will be subject to a $35.00 NSF fee. We do not bill insurance
directly, but we will PreP are a “suPer bill” which you can submit to your insurance comP any for
reimbursement, if your insurance covers naturoP athic medical visits.

Phone calls and emails regarding an existing health issue that require more than 10 minutes of
attention from your doctor will incur a fee. Phone calls and emails regarding a new health issue, regardless of
the length of time of attention required, will also incur a fee. Your doctor will notify you of the need for a
charge, so that you can detennine whether you would like to address the issue and Pay the fee, or schedule an
aPPointment.

We request that you Provide us with 24 hours advance notice of cancellations. APPointments missed
or cancelled in less than 24 hours will incur a $50 charge.

>l< >l< >l<

I have read and understand the above—stated Policies of Equinox Natural Medicine and will comPly with them
in all resPects.

 

Patient Name (Please Print. Include Parent/guardian name if Patient is a minor.)

 

Patient Signature (Parent/guardian signature if minor) Date

