Insert Hospital Name
CONSENT FOR INDUCTION OF LABOR

Ifyou are considering an elective induction oflabor, please read the information provided. The risks associated with
an elective induction may outweigh the possible beneﬁts, especially ifthis is aﬁrst time labor. You should also discuss
this with your physician.

YOUR LABOR INDUCTION
Labor induction is usually done with a medication called Oxytocin or Pitocin. With your practitioner’s order, our
staff will start the medication at a standard dose and increase it over time to achieve labor progress. While you are
getting the medication we will closely monitor the baby’s heart rate and your contractions. The length of labor
depends on how dilated or "ripe” your cervix is at the start ofthe induction. In general the more dilated you are,
the quicker your labor will progress. Also, ifthis not your first birth, labor may progress faster.

Ifyour cervix is already fairly dilated, your practitioner may start your induction by breaking the bag ofwater. We
may schedule a cervical ripening the day before your induction, ifyour cervix is closed and not shortening. This
procedure may soften your cervix and cause it to begin to dilate. Ripening your cervix may make the Oxytocin more
effective when it is begun. Additionally, ripening your cervix may trigger the onset ofyour labor.

WHY ARE LABOR INDUCTIONS PERFORMED?
Labor inductions are performed for many reasons. Clearly, some reasons are more urgent than others. Here are
just a few examples:
0 A woman is past her due date.
0 A woman is experiencing medical problems that place her or her baby at risk, such as high blood pressure,
diabetes, rupture ofthe bag ofwater, etc.
o The baby or babies may be small or the amniotic ﬂuid too low.

WHAT ARE THE POTENTIAL RISKS AND BENEFITS OF LABOR INDUCTION?
It is always important to consider the potential benefits and risks ofany procedure. The risks include, but are not
limited to the following:
o A greater risk of cesarean birth delivery, especially with an "unripe” cervix.
o Longer labors
0 Higher chance ofa vacuum or forceps delivery.
0 Side effects associated with medications or unintended adverse reactions. For example, it is possible to cause
contractions that are too frequent and may affect the baby’s heart rate. This is why careful monitoring ofyour
baby’s heart rate is necessary during labor induction.

Ifyou are considering an elective induction, the risks may outweigh the possible benefits, especially ifthis is a first
time labor.

CONSENT FOR INDUCTIONS OF LABOR

Indications for Induction:

 

I have read the above information and I have had the chance to ask my practitioner questions. All of my questions
have been answered to my satisfaction. I wish to proceed with the induction.

 

Patient Signature Date

 

Provider Signature Date

