llllllllllllllllll

Informed Consent Form ESUHCNT

Surgery with Blood Consent

l. Information provided:

I, ,(Name of Patient or Designated Decision Maker) have been informed that the

 

surgery, procedure, or treatment to be performed is to: Robotic total hip arthroplasty(site) (side) ,
the purpose of which is to hip arthritis.

ll. Documentation of Informed Consent
A On Form _Attached Ofﬁce Note _Progress Notes _H&P

1. I understand that the potential benefits and outcomes ofthe proposed surgery, procedure, or treatment include but are not limited
to: return to active lifestyle

2. I understand that the potential risks and complications associated with the surgery, procedure, or treatment include but are not
limited to: bleeding / infection/ blood clot, injury to nerve/ tendon, fracture, dislocation, foot drop, leg length discrepancy, failure of
surgery, loss of limb or life, failure of hardware

3. Alternatives to the proposed surgeries, procedures, and treatments for my condition including the option of no treatment have
been discussed with me. These include but are not limited to:
no surgery

I”. Serial Procedures —I understand that I will receive a series of the same treatments over a time period not to exceed 180 days.

From / /_to / /_ N.A.
IV. Specific to Surgery
1. It has been explained to me that sometimes during surgery, it is discovered that additional surgery is needed. If, in the opinion of the

doctor who is operating, I need such additional surgery, I permit the doctor to proceed.

2. Iconsent to being photographer or filmed during the course of m operation or treatment. I understand that and that the
photographs/films will be used for educational and research purposes only and that my name will not be placed on the
photographs/films used for educational and research purposes. I understand the photographs intended for my medical record will
be identified by my name and may not be released or used without my expressed agreement. NA I do not want my
photographs/films released or used for educational purposes.

3. lauthorize the physicians and the INOVA Health System to preserve for scientific research, or teaching purposes, or to dispose of
any tissues, body parts, or organs removed as a necessary part of my care according to hospital policy, with the following exceptions:

(send copy of any exceptions to Department of Pathology.

4. lunderstand that, at the request of my physician, a vendor or medical equipment representative may be present during the
performance of my procedure. Presence shall be limited to providing information for coordination of treatment and technical
expertise on the use and operation of the vendor’s device under the supervision of my physician. NA

 

mm M In [what cw

INOVA HEALTH SYSTEM

INFDHMED GDNSENT FORM
SURGERY wilh BlﬂllD CONSENT

mr-smLa-mlmn- wuss: q}

 

VI. Consent 7 Consent expires within 30 days of signatures

l have had the opportunity to ask questions and have them answered. l understand the risks, beneﬁts. and
alternatives associated wrth the proposed operation, procedure, or treatment. | consent to the operation, procedure,
or treatment to be performed.

Surgery Yes No

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Biood Yes _— No ﬂ
Patiem’s Signature Date Time
Witness Signature Date Time

The patient is unable to consent because:
Therefore I consent for the patient.
Esignated Decision Maker Signature Date T ime

 

 

I declare that I have personally explained the above information to the patient or the patients designated decision
maker.

 

 

 

 

 

Physician Date Time
Consent by telephone obtained from:
Witness who has listened over the telephone Date Time

 

Licensed Clinician

 

 

Hanan IDENTIFICAHDN

INOVA HEALTH SYSTEM

INFIIBMED CONSENT FORM
SURGERY with BLOOD CONSENT

EAT Iﬂmﬁﬁ F H‘Hlﬂln ' FREE OF 50

5. I understand that othet practitioners such as surgical residents. surgical first assistants,

FIN first assistants. and physician assistants may assist my Surgeon in performing
important parts oi my surgery, and that the type of assistance these practitioners will
provide, if any, may not be known until the procedure begins. Each practitioner will asURCNT

have appropriate skill sets to participate in the procedure and will be under the supervision
of the primary surgeon. I understand the names of other practitioners and the tasks they penormed will be

documented in the medical record.

V. Transfusion of Blood Products (Red Blood Cells. Platelets, Fresh Frozen Plasma and Cryoprecipitate)

Benefits of Blood ProductTransfusiun—
Symptoms that may improve after a transfusion include:

. anemia

o bleeding problems
- acute bloodless

Risks

. I understand that blood transfusion(s) may be required during my surgery or procedure

. All blood products have a minimal risk of transmitting an infectious disease and are tested according to federal
guidelines. However. no Screening process is 100 percent effective and some risks will remain. Viruses are not
commonly transmitted but could cause a serous disease.

. Using our current testing methods the risk at getting HIV is less than one in 1.9 million units, Hepatitis C is less
than one in 1.8 million units and Hepatitis B is less than one in 205,000 Units.

- Other risks include bacterial contamination of blood {which may result in life threatening infection) and
transfusion errors, which are rare.

. Multiple organ dysfunction and death

. Transfusion reactions which are unpredictable could include:

0
O
D

0

fever and chills

allergic reactions which may cause itching and hives and could become serious

shortness of breath andfor destruction of the transfused red blood cells. affecting the kidneys or liver
and possibly causing jaundice

chest pain

pounding headache and for flushed leeling

a delayed reaction 10 to 14 days atter the transfusion which can shorten the effective life of the red

blood cells.

Please notify your nurse or physician it you experience any of these symptoms.

Alternatives to Blood Product Transfusion
Please be sure to discuss the alternatives with your physician. Make sure you understand what will happen if you

chose not to have a blood transfusion

 

 

I have reviewed and understand this information on blood transfusion and have had the opportunity to ask questions of
the physician and understand the risks, benefits and alternatives involved in transfusion therapy.
El BLOOD ADMINISTRATION IS NOT ANTICIPATED FOR THIS PROCEDURE

1 consent to the transfusion of all blood products
I consent to the transfusion of all blood products with certain exceptions (patient designates):

 

| retuse to give consent for transfusion of all blood products

PATIENT IDENTIFICAIIDN

iNOVA HEA LTH SYSTEM

INFORMED CONSENT FORM
SURGERY with BLOOD CIINSENT

CAT IWOSSFHHOSID - PKGS or 50

