KINGS COUNTY HOSPITAL CENTER

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

POLICY & PROCEDURE MANUAL HOSPITAL MANUAL#: 90-02-06
DEPT: RISK MANAGEMENT
DEPT: MANUAL (DM)#: Page 1 of 13 Pages
ICATEGORY: RIGHTS and RESPONSIBILITIES of the INDIVIDUAL (RI)
SUBJECT: DO NOT RESUSCITATE (DNR - NO EMERGENCY CPR — RI. 1.05.01
|DATE ISSUED: March 2002 SUPERSEDES: 90-01-06
(COVER SHEET)

|. POLICY STATEMENT:

To comply with the Patient’s Self Determination Act and the mandates of New
York State as they relate to DO NOT RESUSCITATE (DNR) regulations
promulgated by the State Health Department.

It is the policy at Kings County Hospital Center that all physicians adhere to the
guidelines established in the attached Policy and Procedure when there has
been a request forthe issuance ofa DNR Order.

PURPOSE:

To provide the rules and procedures that must be followed, in accordance with
New York State Law and the Health and Hospital Corporation’s policy when
writing an Order Not to Resuscitate (DNR) at Kings County Hospital Center.

SCOPE:
This procedure and policy applies to all medical, nursing and administrative staff.

RESPONSIBILITY:
1. It is the responsibility of the physician to take appropriate action when
there is a request forthe issuance ofa DNR Order.

2. At the Physician’s request, the appropriate clinical administrator will be
available as a resource to assist with the review to ensure compliance with
the attached documentation requirements. The Risk Manager is also
available as a resource. During off hours the AOD and/or Risk Manager is
available to review each request.

3. Physicians are to follow the appropriate documentation sheets which set
forth the steps to be taken before the issuance ofa DNR Order.

4. Attached to each documentation sheet are any consent forms which may
be necessary before a DNR Order is written.

 

 

 

 

 

HM#:90-02-06 Page 2 0f 13

 

 

ICATEGORY: RIGHTS and RESPONSIBILITIES of the INDIVIDUAL (RI)

 

 

SUBJECT:

DO NOT RESUSCITATE (DNR)

 

 

(CONTINUATION PAGE)

V.

PROCEDURES:

New York Health Law section 2960-2978 and Regulations of the New York State
Commissioner of health - 10 NYCRR 405.42 set forth circumstances under which
the hospital may authorize the issuance of DNR Order, which are orders not to
attempt cardiopulmonary resuscitation of a patient.

Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation (CPR) ofa patient is an invaluable method of
preventing sudden unexpected death. Legally, every patient is presumed to
consent to CPR in the event of cardiac or pulmonary arrest. However, in certain
circumstances, with appropriate consent, an order not to resuscitate may be
appropriate. Accordingly, the Hospital requires that the following procedure be
followed whenever an order not to resuscitate a patient is considered. In the
absence ofa valid written DNR order, resuscitation should be instituted on all
patients with sudden unexpected cardiopulmonary arrest. The procedure
embodies the following concepts:

1. ENCOURAGEMENT OF EARLY DIALOGUE AND DISCUSSION OF
CPR WITH THE PATIENT OR WHERE APPROPRIATE THE
SURROGATE.

The patient’s Attending Physician should discuss the use of CPR with any
patient having capacity for DNR decisions or when appropriate with the
surrogate, when there is substantial reason to believe that a patient will
suffer cardiopulmonary arrest during the current hospitalization or in the
near future.

2. NOTIFICATION TO STAFF OF DNR STATUS.
Notification to staff of DNR status must be made immediately following
such determination. It must be clear and unambiguous. It is the
responsibility of the Attending Physician to insure that the DNR order and
its meanings are discussed with appropriate members of the hospital staff,
particularly the charge nurse.

3. IDENTIFICATION OF DNR PATIENTS.
Upon identiﬁcation of a DNR patient, the charge nurse/primary nurse will
place a Purple Dot Tab on the patient’s
- Patient’s Kardex
and
- a Purple Identiﬁcation Band on the patient

 

 

 

 

 

HM#:90-02-06 Page 3 0f 13

 

 

ICATEGORY: RIGHTS and RESPONSIBILITIES of the INDIVIDUAL (RI)

 

 

SUBJECT: DO NOT RESUSCITATE (DNR)

 

 

 

 

(CONTINUATION PAGE)

4. EFFECTS OF A DNR ORDER ON OTHER TREATMENT.
Issuance of a DNR order shall not constitute authority to withhold or
withdraw medical treatment otherthan cardiopulmonary resuscitation. A
DNR order is compatible with carrying out other possible life sustaining
measures forthe patient. Nothing in this procedure is intended to indicate
to the medical and nursing staff orto the patient and family an intention to
diminish appropriate medical and nursing care to the patient.

5. PHYSICIAN REVIEW OF DNR ORDERS.

a. At least once every seven days the Attending Physician must
review the chart of each patient for whom a DNR order has been
issued in orderto determine that the order is still medically
appropriate. If it is determined that a DNR order is appropriate the
order must be rewritten no laterthan the seventh day by the
Attending Physician. DNR orders must be reviewed ifthere is
improvement in the patients condition. All reviews must be
documented in the Medical Record.

b. lfthe attending physician determines that a DNR order is no longer
appropriate due to improvement in the patient’s condition, he or she
must immediately notify the person who consented to the order.
The hospital utilizes the Ethics Consultation Committee as the
mechanism forthe dispute resolution in the process of performing
DNR orders. If that person refuses to revoke consent to the order,
the attending physician must submit the matterto the Hospital’s
Consultation Committee except where the person who consented
was a surrogate, parent or guardian. And if any physician
determines that the patient no longer suffers from the medical
condition which gave rise to the consent to the DNR order, then the
attending physician must:

Record this determination in the patients’ medical record
Immediately cancel the DNR order

Notify the person who consented to the cancellation, and
Notify the Hospital staff ofthe cancellation

If a DNR order was issued on the consent of an agent or
surrogate and the patient subsequently gains capacity, the
attending physician must immediately cancel the order, and
notify the agent or surrogate and the Hospital staff ofthe
cancellation.

.U‘J‘WN.‘

c. A physician’s failure to review the order on time does not make the
order ineffective.

 

 

 

HM#:90-02-06 Page 4 0f 13

 

 

ICATEGORY: RIGHTS and RESPONSIBILITIES of the INDIVIDUAL (RI)

 

 

SUBJECT: DO NOT RESUSCITATE (DNR)

 

 

 

(CONTINUATION PAGE)

6. REVOCATION OF CONSENT TO A DNR ORDER

a. At any time, a patient may revoke consent to a DNR order for
himself, by a written or oral declaration to a physician or nurse of
the Hospital, or by any other acts evidencing the intent to revoke
the consent.

b. A health care agent, surrogate, parent or guardian who consented
to an order on behalf of a patient may revoke his/her consent by
notifying a physician or nurse in the Hospital in a written statement,
dated and signed or by orally notifying the attending physician in
the presence of one witness age 18 years or older.

c. Any physician notiﬁed of a revocation must immediately cancel the
DNR order, note the revocation in the patient’s medical record and
notify the Hospital staff of the revocation and cancellation of the
order. Any nurse notified of the revocation must immediately notify
a physician ofthe revocation.

7. INTER-INSTITUTIONAL TRANSFER.

a. If a DNR order is issued for a patient at KCHC and the patient is
transferred to another hospital, KCHC shall notify the ambulance
personnel and the hospital to which the patient is being transferred
ofthe DNR order.

b. lfthe DNR order is issued for a patient at another facility and the
patient is transferred to KCHC, the order is effective until the
attending physician examines the patient and either:

0 Issues an order to continue the DNR order or
o Cancels the DNR order

c. If the attending physician determines that a DNR order is no longer
appropriate, he or she must immediately notify the person who
consented to the order and the hospital staff responsible for the
patient’s care and/or proceed as outlined in 5(b) ofthis policy.

8. DNR ORDERS IN THE OR.
1. OR. Booking Office and Clinical Director of Anesthesia should be
informed by attending surgeon ofthe scheduling of a patient with a
DNR order.

 

 

 

 

HM#:90-02-06 Page 5 0f 13

 

 

ICATEGORY: RIGHTS and RESPONSIBILITIES of the INDIVIDUAL (RI)

 

 

SUBJECT: DO NOT RESUSCITATE (DNR)

 

 

 

 

(CONTINUATION PAGE)

2. In the event of surgery scheduled for a patient with a DNR order,
the existing order can only be suspended after explicit discussion
between the appropriately designated medical staff, and with
consent ofthe patient, or if appropriate, the patients health care
agent or surrogate. Explicit discussion regarding cardiopulmonary
resuscitation should identify cardiopulmonary resuscitation, as
specified in New York State regulations, as measures to restore
cardiac function or to support ventilation in the event of cardiac or
respiratory arrest. In this regard, cardiopulmonary resuscitation
shall not include measures to improve ventilation and cardiac
functions in the absence of an arrest.

3. The duration of any suspension of DNR order should be discussed
with patient, agent or surrogate before surgery to allow agreement
in advance about reinstatement of DNR order. Any suspension will
remain in effect postoperatively or at least until the anesthesiologist
has evaluated the patient to be recovered from the effects of
anesthesia. While the time period for suspension should be
discussed with the family, a 24 hour period is suggested.

 

4. In the event that the patient elects not to suspend the DNR order
the wishes ofthe patient, agent or surrogate must be respected.
This means that resuscitation outside the normal realm of
anesthetic practice would n_ot be instituted.

5. Disagreement of whetherto suspend a DNR order or an ethical
conflict among the professional parties involved may be referred to
the Ethics Committee.

The speciﬁc procedures required to be followed will vary with the circumstances
presented by the patient. The physician should referto the following number
coded documentation sheets for speciﬁc types of patient requirements.

- Adult with Decisional Capacity #1

- Adult without Decisional Capacity #2
and with a Surrogate

- Adult Patients Qualifying for #3
Therapeutic Exceptions

- Adult Patients without Decisional #4

Capacity and without a Surrogate
- Minor Patients #5

 

 

 

HM#:90-02-06 Page 6 0f 13

 

 

ICATEGORY: RIGHTS and RESPONSIBILITIES of the INDIVIDUAL (RI)

 

 

SUBJ ECT:

DO NOT RESUSCITATE (DNR)

 

 

(CONTINUATION PAGE)

A.
1.

Adult with Decisional Capacity - #1
An adult with capacity must consent before a DNR order is issued unless the
therapeutic exception is invoked.

The consent must be obtained at or about the time the order is issued, even ifthe
patient previously had consented to a DNR order.

Priorto consenting to a DNR order, the patient must be given information about
his/her diagnosis, prognosis, the reasonable foreseeable risks and benefits of
CPR and the consequences of a DNR order.

Consent must be documented in writing, dated and signed in the presence of two
witnesses who must sign the document and who must be 18 years of age or older,
or orally in the presence of two witnesses, both 18 years of age or older, one of
whom must be a physician afﬁliated with the hospital.

The patient’s consent obtained by the attending physician must be recorded in the
medical chart. This is automatically done by placing the completed #1
documentation sheet in the Medical Record.

Once the attending physician obtains consent, the physician must:
a. Issue a DNR order and inform the hospital staff responsible for the
patient’s care that the order has been issued; or

b. Tell the patient of his objections to issuing the order, and eithertransfer
the patient to another physician or submit the issue to the Ethics
Committee for dispute resolution.

If a member ofthe hospital staff responsible forthe case of a patient for whom a
DNR order has been issued objects to providing care in accordance with the
order, the Hospital shall take reasonable steps, such as adjustment in staff
assignments, consistent with the care and needs of the patients, to accommodate
the staff members’ objections.

If a patient has been transferred from a mental hygiene facility, notice of the
patient’s consent to a DNR order must be given to the administrator ofthe mental
hygiene facility. lfthe administrator concludes that the patient does not have
capacity or that a DNR order is inconsistent with the hospital’s wishes, the
Administrator may submit the issue to the Hospital’s Ethics Committee for dispute
resolution.

 

 

 

 

 

HM#:90-02-06 Page 7 0f 13

 

 

ICATEGORY:

RIGHTS and RESPONSIBILITIES of the INDIVIDUAL (RI)

 

 

SUBJ ECT:

DO NOT RESUSCITATE (DNR)

 

 

(CONTINUATION PAGE)

B. Adult without Decisional Capacity and with a Health Care Agent or
Surrogate - #2

1. For adults who lack capacity, consent of a health care agent or surrogate is
required before a DNR order may be issued.

a.

An adult with capacity may designate a health care or surrogate to make a
DNR decision in the event that the adult is subsequently determined to
lack capacity, in either oftwo ways:

i) in writing, dated and signed in the presence of two witnesses, age
18 or older, who must also sign the document or,

ii) orally, during hospitalization, to two adult witnesses one of whom
must be a physician affiliated with KCHC.

lfthere is no person designated as a health care agent or surrogate by the
patient, one of the following persons, in order of priority listed, may be
empowered to act as a surrogate.

- Ajudicially appointed committee or guardian of the patient, if one
has been appointed.

- A spouse

- A son or daughter at least 18 years old

- A parent

- A brother or sister at least 18 years old

- A close friend

The name of the health care agent or surrogate must be entered in the
patient’s Medical Record.

A determination that a health care agent or surrogate lacks capacity to act
as a surrogate shall be made in the same manner as the determination
made concerning patients who lack capacity. The health care agent or
surrogate who has been determined to lack capacity may appeal to the
Hospital’s Ethics Consultation Committee. The Committee’s findings are
final.

2. The basis for the health care agent or surrogates’ decision must be the patient’s
wishes (including religious and moral beliefs), or if unknown the patient’s best
interests.

 

 

 

 

 

HM#:90-02-06 Page 8 0f 13

 

 

ICATEGORY:

RIGHTS and RESPONSIBILITIES of the INDIVIDUAL (RI)

 

SUBJ ECT:

 

DO NOT RESUSCITATE (DNR)

 

 

(CONTINUATION PAGE)

3. The health care agent or surrogate may consent to a DNR order only if the
attending physician and a concurring physician, who has examined the patient
and determined that:

the patient has a terminal condition; or,

the patient is permanently unconscious; or

resuscitation would be medically futile; or

resuscitation would impose an extraordinary burden on the patient in light
ofthe patient’s condition and the expected outcome of resuscitation.

The physician’s determination must be included in the patient’s chart by including the #2
documentation form in the Medical Record. lfa physician is designated as the
surrogate, he/she may not make the determination concerning DNR order.

C. Minor Patient - #5

1.

The attending physician, in consultation with a custodial parent or
guardian, must determine if the minor has capacity to make a resuscitation
decision.

Before a DNR order may be issued, the consent of a custodial parent and
the minor, if he/she has been determined to have capacity, must be
obtained.

lfthe attending physician has reason to believe there is another parent
who has maintained substantial and continuous contact with the minor and
who has not been informed ofthe DNR decision, the physician must make
diligent efforts to notify that parent of the DNR decision priorto issuing the
order.

A parent or guardian may consent to a DNR order on behalf of a minor
only ifthe attending physician determines, in writing, and with the written
concurrence of a second physician on the KCHC medical staff, based
upon a personal examination ofthe patient, that to a reasonable degree of
medical certainty:

- the minor has a terminal condition, or

- the minor is permanently unconscious, or

- resuscitation would be medically futile, or

- resuscitation would impose an extraordinary burden on the minor in
light ofthe medical condition and the expected outcome.

 

 

 

 

 

HM#:90-02-06 Page 9 0f 13

 

 

ICATEGORY:

RIGHTS and RESPONSIBILITIES of the INDIVIDUAL (RI)

 

 

SUBJ ECT:

DO NOT RESUSCITATE (DNR)

 

 

(CONTINUATION PAGE)

Such determination must be entered in the minor’s medical record by
placing the completed form in the chart.

The parent or guardian in making a decision on behalf ofthe minor, must
considerthe minor’s religious and moral beliefs.

lfthe minor was transferred from a mental hygiene facility, notice ofthe
decision to issue a DNR order must be given to the designated
administrator. lfthe designated administrator believes that issuance of the
order is inconsistent with regulation, the matter may be submitted to the
Hospital’s Ethics Consultation Committee for ﬁnal decision.

lfthe physician has actual knowledge of an objection to an issuance ofa
DNR order by a parent otherthan the consenting parent, the physician
must submit the matterto the Ethics Consultation Committee.

D. Adults Qualifyinq for Therapeutic Exceptions - #3

1.

DNR order may be issued without the consent of an adult who has
capacity ifthe attending physician determines, to a reasonable degree of
medical certainty, that the adult patient would suffer immediate and severe
injury from a discussion of CPR, but only after;

- obtaining a concurring second opinion from another physician on
the KCHC Medical Staff, who personally examined the patient and
who confirms that a discussion of CPR will cause immediate and
severe injury to the patient and;

- ascertaining the patient’s wishes to the extent possible without
subjecting the patient to immediate and severe injury and;

- including the reason for not consulting with the patient in the
medical record and;

- obtaining the consent of a health care agent or surrogate.

When this limited exception is invoked, the physician must reassess the
patient’s risk of injury from a discussion of CPR on a regular basis (at least
every seventh day) and must discuss resuscitation with the patient as
soon as the medical basis for not consulting with the patient no longer
exists.

 

 

 

 

 

HM#:90-02-06 Page 10 0f 13

 

 

ICATEGORY: RIGHTS and RESPONSIBILITIES of the INDIVIDUAL (RI)

 

 

SUBJECT: DO NOT RESUSCITATE (DNR)

 

 

 

 

(CONTINUATION PAGE)

3. lfthe patient has been transferred from a mental hygiene facility, notice of
the DNR order must be given to the designated administrator. lfthe
designated administrator believes that the order is inconsistent with the
regulations, the matter may be referred to the Ethics Consultation
Committee.

E. Adult Patients without Capacity and without A Surroqate - #4

1. A DNR order may be issued for an adult who lacks capacity and who had
not previously expressed a decision regarding CPR, on behalf of whom no
surrogate is reasonably available, willing and competent to make a
decision, under either ofthe following conditions:

- The attending physician has determined in writing that, to a
reasonable degree of medical certainty, resuscitation would be
medically futile, and a second physician on the KCHC Medical
Staff, after personal examination ofthe patient, concurs in writing
with the attending physician’s determination, or;

- A court has granted a judgement directing the issuance of a DNR
order to fulfill the following Judicial Review Process.

2. JUDICIAL REVIEW

a. The patient, an attending physician, parent or guardian ofa minor,
a non-custodial parent ofa minor, any person on the surrogate list,
the Executive Director, orthe Director of a Mental Hygiene Facility
may commence a special court proceeding regarding the issuance
of any DNR order, except where a decision by a patient not to
consent to a DNR order is not subject to a court review.

b. lfJudicial Review is sought, a court may issue a temporary
restraining order, suspending the DNR order, pending the court’s
final disposition ofthe case. The Hospital will be bound by such an
order and any ﬁnal determination regarding the patient issued by
the court.

c. At any time, a patient may commence a special proceeding in court
to resolve a dispute without ﬁrst having to go through the Hospital’s
Ethics Consultation Review Process Committee.

 

 

 

HM#: 90-02-06 Page 11 0f 13

 

 

ICATEGORY:

RIGHTS and RESPONSIBILITIES of the INDIVIDUAL (RI)

 

 

SUBJECT:

DO NOT RESUSCITATE (DNR)

 

 

(CONTINUATION PAGE)

However, all other disputes must be submitted to the Hospital’s Ethics
Consultative Review Committee and the Committee must have concluded its
efforts, or 72 hours after submission must have lapsed before a court proceeding
can be commenced.

JUDICIALLY APPROVED DNR ORDERS

a. lfthere is no health care agent or surrogate reasonably available, willing
and competent to make a decision on behalf of an adult patient who lacks
capacity and who had not previously expressed a decision regarding
resuscitation, an attending physician, orthe Hospital may commence a
special court proceeding forjudicial approval to issue a DNR order.

b. In orderto obtain a court order, one ofthe following must apply:

- the patient is in a terminal condition

- the patient is permanently unconscious

- resuscitation would impose an extraordinary burden on the patient,
in light of his medical condition and the probable outcome of
resuscitation.

- resuscitation would be medically futile.

c. Additionally, it must be shown that issuance ofthe DNR order is consistent
with patient’s wishes, including religious and moral beliefs, or in the
absence of evidence regarding his wishes, the patient’s best interests.

If a patient is in this category or has been transferred from a mental hygiene
facility, notice ofthe order must be given to the Executive Director. If the
Executive Director believes that the patient has capacity or that issuance ofthe
order is inconsistent with any provision ofthe law, the Executive Director may
submit the issue to the Hospital’s Ethics Consultation Committee.

The patient must be given notice ofthe decision to issue a DNR order ifthere is
any indication that the patient can comprehend the notice unless it is determined
that notice would cause immediate and severe injury to the patient. lfthe patient
objects to the order, it may not be issued.

 

 

 

 

 

HM#: 90-02-06

Page

12 of 13

 

 

ICATEGORY: RIGHTS and RESPONSIBILITIES of the INDIVIDUAL (RI)

 

 

SUBJECT: DO NOT RESUSCITATE (DNR)

 

 

(CONTINUATION PAGE)

Attachments

Att. |
Att. ||
Att. |||
Att. IV
Att. V

Adult with Decisional Capacity - #1
Adult without Decisional Capacity and with a Surrogate - #2
Adult patient Qualifying for Therapeutic Exceptions - #3
Adult patient without Decisional Capacity and without a surrogate - #4

Minor Patients - #5

 

 

 

 

 

HM#: 90-02-06

Page 13 of 13

 

 

ICATEGORY:

RIGHTS and RESPONSIBILITIES of the INDIVIDUAL (RI)

 

SUBJECT:

 

DO NOT RESUSCITATE (DNR)

 

 

(SIGNATUREILAST PAGE)

Date Revised: 6/93, 2/97, 7/00, 11/01, 2/02

 

PREPARED BY:

REVIEWED BY:

REVIEWED BY:

REVIEWED BY:

REVIEWED BY:

APPROVED BY:

 

Paulette Bainbridge
Sr. Associate Director, Risk Management

Kathie T. Rones. MD.
Medical Director

Robert S. Kurtz, M.D.
Chair, CPR Committee

Pearl John-Stiell
Deputy Executive Director, Patient Care Services

Sharon Neysmith-Crawford
Associate Executive Director, Regulatory Affairs

Antonio D. Martin 3/23/09
Executive Director Date

 

 

Reviewed: 4/03, 6/05, 3/09

 

 

