Niagara” Region Grade 8 HPV vaccination

consent form

 

1. Please read vaccine information before filling out consent form.
2. Complete all sections on the front of this consent form with blue or black pen.
3. Both the parent/legal guardian and student must sign this consent form and return it to the child‘s teacher.

This consent form must be signed bya parent or legal guardian of the child. A “legal guardian” is an individual who has been
awarded legal guardianship of a child by a court of law. For the purpose of this consent form, we cannot accept forms signed
by other caregivers or persons with whom the child resides without proof of their status as a legal guardian of the child.

 

A. Student Information (Please Print)
Last name First name

 

Date of Ontario health card #
birth Year Month Day I I I I - I I I I - I I I I
School name Teacher

 

 

 

 

 

 

Home address City Postal code

 

 

 

Parent/legal guardian name (please Relationship to Home phone: Work or cell:
print) student:
Health care provider (doctor)

 

 

 

 

B nurovidin our health care nrovider’s name, ou are authorizin- Nia-ara Radon Public Health to communicate With that health care .roviderabout immunization issues.

 

B. Student’s health history
Check one If yes, please explain
Any serious past or present medical problems? DYes DNo
(e.g. Guillain-Barre Syndrome)
Take any prescription or non-prescription medications? DYes DNo

 

 

 

Any previous serious reaction(s) to any vaccines? DYes DNo

 

Any known allergies? (food, drugs, latex, yeast, DYes DNo

aluminum, formaldeh de, di-htheria toxoid, other
C. Consent or refusal for immunization

l have read or had the information explained to me about the HPV vaccine. I understand the benefits, side effects and risks. Any

questions have been answered to my satisfaction. Unless I notify Public Health, this consent is valid until all doses are complete.

Please complete HPV consent below:

HPV CONSENT (check one!

0 Yes, please vaccinate my child with Gardasi|® (Strains 6, 11, 16, 18).

 

 

O N_ol please do not vaccinate my child with Gardasil® (Strains 6, 11, 16, 18). I understand the risks to my
child if not vaccinated.

My daughter has received one or more doses of HPV vaccine. Check the vaccine given and list dates below:

 

 

 

 

OGardasi|® OCeNarix®
Dose 1 Date: Dose 2 Date: Dose 3 Date(if applicable):
Parent/legal guardian signature: X Date:
Student signature: X Date:

 

All personal (health) information collected and used is kept conﬁdential and may be disclosed only as permitted under the Municipal Freedom oflhformatioh and Protection of Privacy Act (MFIPPA) and the
Personal Health Information Protection Act, 2004 (PHIPA). Information is collectedfor the purpose ofprovidihg services to you under the Vaccine Preventable Disease Program and in accordance with the
Health Protection and Promotion Act or other applicable legislation. You have the right to View and correct this information, or withhold or revoke your consent usually without affecting the services
provided here. lfyou have any questions about our policy, please contact the Freedom oflhformatioh and Privacy Coordinator at 90576854225 ext. 3741.

FOR NURSE’S USE ONLY

 

 

 

Nurse’s Assessment 1St Assessment 2"” Assessment 3Irdl Assessment
Do you have a fever or are you sick today? OYes O No OYes ONo OYes ONo
Has anything changed with your health OYes O No OYes ONo OYes ONo
recently?

Are you pregnant or breastfeeding? OYes O No OYes O No OYes O No
Did you have any problems with a previous OYes O No OYes ONo OYes ONo
close of HPV vaccine?

 

 

 

 

Nurse’s Notes:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Vaccines administered and documented as per Niagara Region Vaccine Department Medical Directive HPV V-050.24

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Vaccine Date Time Dose/ Site Lot#/Expiry Nurse’s signature
(yy/mm/dd) route date
Dose 1 HPV Left Deltoid
0.5ml D upper
Gardasil® ”VI D lower
DSee Panorama
Dose 2 HPV Left Deltoid
0.5ml D upper
Gardasil® ”VI D lower
DSee Panorama
Dose 3 HPV Left Deltoid
(If applicable) 0.5ml D upper
”Vl D lower
Gardasil® DSee Panorama
Absent Doc mentation
Round #1 Round #2
Date: Date:
Signature: Signature:
Option sheet mailed D Option sheet mailed D

 

 

Additional noteslplans:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Revised: July 2015

