Conditions of Admission and Consent for Outpatient Care
In this document, “Patient” means the person receiving treatment. “Patient Representative” means
any person acting on behalf of the Patient and signing as the Patient’s representative. Use of the
word “I”, “you”, “your” or “me” may in context include both the Patient and the Patient
Representative. With respect to financial obligations “I” or “me” may also, depending on the
context, mean financial guarantor “Guarantor”.
“Provider” means the hospital and may include healthcare professionals on the hospital’s staff
and/or hospital-based physicians, which include but are not limited to: Emergency Department
Physicians, Pathologists, Radiologists, Anesthesiologists, Hospitalists, certain other licensed
independent practitioners and any authorized agents, contractors, affiliates, successors or assignees
acting on their behalf.
Legal Relationship between Hospital and Physicians. Most or all of the physicians performing
services in the hospital are independent and are not hospital agents or employees. Independent
physicians are responsible for their own actions and the hospital shall not be liable for the acts or
omissions of any such independent physicians.
1.

Consent to Treatment. I consent to the procedures which may be performed during this
hospitalization or during an outpatient episode of care, including, but not limited to, emergency
treatment or services, and which may include laboratory procedures, x-ray examination, diagnostic
procedures, medical, nursing or surgical treatment or procedures, anesthesia, or hospital services
rendered as ordered by the Provider. I consent to allowing students as part of their training in health
care education to participate in the delivery of my medical care and treatment or be observers while I
receive medical care and treatment at the Hospital, and that these students will be supervised by
instructors and/or hospital staff. I further consent to the hospital conducting blood-borne infectious
disease testing, including but not limited to, testing for hepatitis, Acquired Immune Deficiency
Syndrome (“AIDS”), and Human Immunodeficiency Virus (“HIV”), if a physician orders such tests or
if ordered by protocol. I understand that the potential side effects and complications of this testing are
generally minor and are comparable to the routine collection of blood specimens, including discomfort
from the needle stick and/or slight burning, bleeding or soreness at the puncture site. The results of
this test will become part of my confidential medical record.

2. Consent to Photographs, Videotapes and Audio Recordings. I consent to photographs, videotapes,
digital or audio recordings, and/or images of me being recorded for security purposes and/or the
hospital’s quality improvement and/or risk management activities. I understand that the facility retains
the ownership rights to the images and/or recordings. I will be allowed to request access to or copies
of the images and/or recordings when technologically feasible unless otherwise prohibited by law. I
understand that these images and/or recordings will be securely stored and protected. Images and/or
recordings in which I am identified will not be released and/or used outside of the facility without a
specific written authorization from me or my legal representative unless otherwise required by law.
3. Financial Agreement. In consideration of the services to be rendered to Patient, Patient or Guarantor
individually promises to pay the Patient’s account at the rates stated in the hospital’s price list (known
as the “Charge Master”) effective on the date the charge is processed for the service provided, which

Conditions of Admission and Consent
for Outpatient Care - English (1/7)
Rev. 09/2014

rates are hereby expressly incorporated by reference as the price term of this agreement to pay the
Patient’s account. Some special items will be priced separately if there is no price listed on the Charge
Master. An estimate of the anticipated charges for services to be provided to the Patient is available
upon request from the hospital. Estimates may vary significantly from the final charges based on a
variety of factors, including, but not limited to, the course of treatment, intensity of care, physician
practices, and the necessity of providing additional goods and services.
Professional services rendered by independent contractors are not part of the hospital bill.
These services will be billed to the Patient separately. I understand that physicians or other health
care professionals may be called upon to provide care or services to me or on my behalf, but that I may
not actually see, or be examined by, all physicians or health care professionals participating in my care;
for example, I may not see physicians providing radiology, pathology, EKG interpretation and
anesthesiology services. I understand that, in most instances, there will be a separate charge for
professional services rendered by physicians to me or on my behalf, and that I will receive a bill for
these professional services that is separate from the bill for hospital services.
The hospital will provide a medical screening examination as required to all Patients who are seeking
medical services to determine if there is an emergency medical condition without regard to the
Patient’s ability to pay. If there is an emergency medical condition, the hospital will provide
stabilizing treatment within its capacity. However, Patient and Guarantor understand that if Patient
does not qualify under the hospital’s charity care policy or other applicable policy, Patient or
Guarantor is not relieved of his/her obligation to pay for these services.
If supplies and services are provided to Patient who has coverage through a governmental program or
through certain private health insurance plans, the hospital may accept a discounted payment for those
supplies and services. In this event any payment required from the Patient or Guarantor will be
determined by the terms of the governmental program or private health insurance plan. If the Patient is
uninsured and not covered by a governmental program, the Patient may be eligible to have his or her
account discounted or forgiven under the hospital’s uninsured discount or charity care programs in
effect at the time of treatment. I understand that I may request information about these programs from
the hospital.
I also understand that, as a courtesy to me, the hospital may bill an insurance company offering
coverage, but may not be obligated to do so. Regardless, I agree that, except where prohibited by law,
the financial responsibility for the services rendered belongs to me, the Patient or Guarantor. I agree to
pay for services that are not covered and covered charges not paid in full by insurance coverage
including, but not limited to, coinsurance, deductibles, non-covered benefits due to policy limits or
policy exclusions, or failure to comply with insurance plan requirements.
This hospital reserves the right not to submit a claim to a patient’s insurance company. Upon written
request, the hospital will provide the information necessary for the patient to file the insurance claim,
except as prohibited by law.
4. Third Party Collection. I acknowledge that the Providers may utilize the services of a third party
Business Associate or affiliated entity as an extended business office (“EBO Servicer”) for medical
account billing and servicing. During the time that the medical account is being serviced by the EBO

Conditions of Admission and Consent
for Outpatient Care - English (2/7)
Rev. 09/2014

Servicer, the account shall not be considered delinquent, past due or in default, and shall not be
reported to a credit bureau or subject to collection legal proceedings. When the EBO Servicer’s efforts
to obtain payment have been exhausted due to a number of factors (for e.g., Patient or Guarantor’s
failure to pay or make a payment arrangement after insurance adjustments and payments have been
credited, and/or the insurer’s denial of claim(s) or benefits is received), the EBO Servicer will send a
final notice letter which will include the date that the medical account may be returned from the EBO
Servicer to the Provider. Upon return to the Provider by the EBO Servicer, the Provider may place the
account back with the EBO Servicer, or, at the option of the Provider, may determine the account to be
delinquent, past due and in default. Once the medical account is determined to be delinquent it may be
subject to late fees, interest as stated, referral to a collection agency for collection as a delinquent
account, credit bureau reporting and enforcement by legal proceedings.
I also agree that if the Provider initiates collection efforts to recover amounts owed by me or my
Guarantor, then, in addition to amounts incurred for the services rendered, Patient or Guarantor will
pay, to the extent permitted by law: (a) any and all costs incurred by the Provider in pursuing
collection, including, but not limited to, reasonable attorneys’ fees, and (b) any court costs or other
costs of litigation incurred by the Provider.
5. Assignment of Benefits. Patient assigns all of his/her rights and benefits under existing policies of
insurance providing coverage and payment for any and all expenses incurred as a result of services and
treatment rendered by the Provider and authorizes direct payment to the Provider of any insurance
benefits otherwise payable to or on behalf of Patient for the hospitalization or for outpatient services,
including emergency services, if rendered. Patient understands that any payment received from these
policies and/or plans will be applied to the amount that Patient or Guarantor has agreed to pay for
services rendered during this admission and, that Provider will not retain benefits in excess of the
amount owed to the Provider for the care and treatment rendered during the admission.
I understand that any health insurance policies under which I am covered may be in addition to other
coverage or benefits or recovery to which I may be entitled, and that Provider, by initially accepting
health insurance coverage, does not waive its rights to collect or accept, as payment in full, any
payment made under different coverage or benefits or any other sources of payment that may or will
cover expenses incurred for services and treatment.
I hereby irrevocably appoint the Provider as my authorized representative to pursue any claims,
penalties, and administrative and/or legal remedies on my behalf for collection against any responsible
payer, employer-sponsored medical benefit plans, third party liability carrier or, any other responsible
third party (“Responsible Party”) for any and all benefits due me for the payment of charges associated
with my treatment. This assignment shall not be construed as an obligation of the Providers to pursue
any such right of recovery. I acknowledge and understand that I maintain my right of recovery against
my insurer or health benefit plan and the foregoing assignment does not divest me of such right.
I agree to take all actions necessary to assist the Provider in collecting payment from any such
Responsible Party should the Provider(s) elect to collect such payment, including allowing the
Provider(s) to bring suit against the Responsible Party in my name. If I receive payment directly from
any source for the medical charges associated with my treatment acknowledge that it is my duty and
responsibility to immediately pay any such payments to the Provider(s).

Conditions of Admission and Consent
for Outpatient Care - English (3/7)
Rev. 09/2014

I assign and transfer to (1) the hospital and to (2) authorized and attending physicians of the hospital
any and all benefits, monies, and sums payable to me for hospitalization, sickness, accident or bodily
injury under any hospitalization, sickness, accident medical payments/PIP/bodily injury or
uninsured/underinsured motorist policy providing for hospital, medical or physician payments.
6. Medicare Patient Certification and Assignment of Benefit. I certify that any information I provide
in applying for payment under Title XVIII (“Medicare”) or Title XIX (“Medicaid”) of the Social
Security Act is correct. I request payment of authorized benefits to be made on my behalf to the
hospital or hospital-based physician by the Medicare or Medicaid program.
7. Private Room. I understand and agree that I am (or Guarantor is) responsible for any additional
charges associated with the request and/or use of a private room.
8. Outpatient Medicare Patients. Medicare does not cover prescription drugs with only a few
exceptions. According to Medicare regulations, I acknowledge that I am responsible for any drugs
furnished to me while an outpatient that meet Medicare’s definition of a prescription drug. These
drugs are also referred to as self-administered drugs, as they are usually self-administered but they may
be administered to me by hospital personnel. Medicare requires hospitals to bill Medicare Patients or
other third party payers for these drugs. Medicare Part D beneficiaries may submit a paper claim to the
Medicare Part D Plan for possible reimbursement of these drugs in accordance with Medicare Drug
Plan enrollment materials.
9.

Communications About My Healthcare. I authorize my healthcare information to be disclosed for
purposes of communicating results, findings, and care decisions to my family members and others I
designate to be responsible for my care. I will provide those individuals with a password or other
verification means specified by the hospital. I agree I may be contacted by the Provider or an agent of
the Provider or an independent physician’s office for the purposes of scheduling necessary follow-up
visits recommended by the treating physician.

10. Consent to Telephone Calls for Financial Communications. I agree that, in order for you, or your
EBO Servicers and collection agents, to service my account or to collect any amounts I may owe, I
expressly agree and consent that you or your EBO Servicer and collection agents may contact me by
telephone at any telephone number I have provided or you or your EBO Servicer and collection agents
have obtained or, at any number forwarded or transferred from that number, regarding the
hospitalization, the services rendered, or my related financial obligations. Methods of contact may
include using pre-recorded/artificial voice messages and/or use of an automatic dialing device, as
applicable.
11. Consent to Email or Text Usage for Discharge Instructions and Other Healthcare
Communications. If at any time I provide an email or text address at which I may be contacted, I
consent to receiving discharge instructions and other healthcare communications at that email or text
address from the Providers. These discharge instructions may include, but not be limited to: postoperative instructions, physician follow-up instructions, dietary information, and prescription
information. The other healthcare communications may include, but are not limited to communications
to family or designated representatives regarding my treatment or condition, or reminder messages to
me regarding appointments for medical care.

Conditions of Admission and Consent
for Outpatient Care - English (4/7)
Rev. 09/2014

12. Release of Information. I hereby permit Providers to release healthcare information for purposes of
treatment, payment or healthcare operations. Healthcare information regarding a prior admission(s) at
other HCA affiliated facilities may be made available to subsequent HCA-affiliated admitting facilities
to coordinate Patient care or for case management purposes. Healthcare information may be released
to any person or entity liable for payment on the Patient’s behalf in order to verify coverage or
payment questions, or for any other purpose related to benefit payment. Healthcare information may
also be released to my employer’s designee when the services delivered are related to a claim under
worker’s compensation. If I am covered by Medicare or Medicaid, I authorize the release of healthcare
information to the Social Security Administration or its intermediaries or carriers for payment of a
Medicare claim or to the appropriate state agency for payment of a Medicaid claim. This information
may include, without limitation, history and physical, emergency records, laboratory reports, operative
reports, physician progress notes, nurse’s notes, consultations, psychological and/or psychiatric
reports, drug and alcohol treatment and discharge summary. Federal and state laws may permit this
facility to participate in organizations with other healthcare providers, insurers, and/or other health care
industry participants and their subcontractors in order for these individuals and entities to share my
health information with one another to accomplish goals that may include but not be limited to:
improving the accuracy and increasing the availability of my health records; decreasing the time
needed to access my information; aggregating and comparing my information for quality improvement
purposes; and such other purposes as may be permitted by law. I understand that this facility may be a
member of one or more such organizations. This consent specifically includes information concerning
psychological conditions, psychiatric conditions, intellectual disability conditions, genetic information,
chemical dependency conditions and/or infectious diseases including, but not limited to, blood borne
diseases, such as HIV and AIDS.
13. Other Acknowledgements.
Personal Valuables. I understand that the hospital maintains a safe for the safekeeping of money and
valuables, and the hospital shall not be liable for the loss of or damage to any money, jewelry,
documents, furs, fur coats and fur garments, or other articles of unusual value and small size, unless
placed in the safe, and shall not be liable for the loss or damage to any other personal property, unless
deposited with the hospital for safekeeping. The liability of the hospital for loss of any personal
property that is deposited with the hospital for safekeeping is limited to the greater of five hundred
dollars ($500.00) or the maximum required by law, unless a written receipt for a greater amount has
been obtained from the hospital by the Patient. The hospital is not responsible for the loss or damage
of cell phones, glasses or dentures or personal valuables unless they are placed in the hospital safe in
accordance with the terms as stated above.
Weapons/Explosives/Drugs. I understand and agree that if the hospital at any time believes there may
be a weapon, explosive device, illegal substance or drug, or any alcoholic beverage in my room or with
my belongings, the hospital may search my room and my belongings located anywhere on hospital
property, confiscate any of the above items that are found, and dispose of them as appropriate,
including delivery of any item to law enforcement authorities.
Patient Visitation Rights. I understand that I have the right to receive the visitors whom I or my
Patient Representative designates, without regard to my relationship to these visitors. I also have the

Conditions of Admission and Consent
for Outpatient Care - English (5/7)
Rev. 09/2014

right to withdraw or deny such consent at any time. I will not be denied visitation privileges on the
basis of age, race, color, national origin, religion, gender, gender identity and gender expression, and
sexual orientation or disability. All visitors I designate will enjoy full and equal visitation privileges
that are no more restrictive than those that my immediate family members would enjoy. Further, I
understand that the hospital may need to place clinically necessary or reasonable restrictions or
limitations on my visitors to protect my health and safety in addition to the health and safety of other
Patients. The hospital will clearly explain the reason for any restrictions or limitations if imposed. If I
believe that my visitation rights have been violated, I or my representative has the right to utilize the
hospital’s complaint resolution system.
Additional Provision for Admission of Minors/ Incapacitated Patient. I, the undersigned,
acknowledge and verify that I am the legal guardian or custodian of the minor/incapacitated patient.
14. Patient Self Determination Act. I have been furnished information regarding Advance Directives
(such as durable power of attorney for healthcare and living wills). Please initial or place a mark next
to one of the following applicable statements:
I executed an Advance
Directive and have been
requested to supply a
copy to the hospital

I have not executed an Advance
Directive, wish to execute one and
have received information on how to
execute an Advance Directive

I have not executed an
Advance Directive and do
not wish to execute one at
this time

15. Notice of Privacy Practices. I acknowledge that I have received the hospital’s Notice of Privacy
Practices, which describes the ways in which the hospital may use and disclose my healthcare
information for its treatment, payment, healthcare operations and other prescribed and permitted uses
and disclosures. I understand that this information may be disclosed electronically by the Provider
and/or the Provider’s business associates. I understand that I may contact the hospital Privacy Officer
designated on the notice if I have a question or complaint.
Acknowledge:

(Initial)

16. Acknowledgement: I have been given the opportunity to read and ask questions about the information
contained in this form, specifically including but not limited to the financial obligation’s provisions
and assignment of benefit provisions, and I acknowledge that I either have no questions or that my
questions have been answered to my satisfaction and that I have signed this document freely and
without inducement other than the rendition of services by the Providers.
Acknowledge:

(Initial)

Conditions of Admission and Consent
for Outpatient Care - English (6/7)
Rev. 09/2014

17.

Acknowledgement of Notice of Patient Rights and Responsibilities. I have been furnished with a
Statement of Patient Rights and Responsibilities ensuring that I am treated with respect and dignity and
without discrimination or distinction based on age, gender, disability, race, color, ancestry, citizenship,
religion, pregnancy, sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, national origin, medical
condition, marital status, veteran status, payment source or ability, or any other basis prohibited by
federal, state, or local law.
Acknowledge: __________________ (Initial)

Date:

I, the undersigned, as the Patient or Patient Representative, or, for a
minor/incapacitated Patient, as the legal guardian, hereby certify I have read,
and fully and completely understand this Conditions of Admission and
Time:
Authorization for Medical treatment, and that I have signed this Conditions
of Admission and Authorization for Medical Treatment knowingly, freely,
voluntarily and agree to be bound by its terms. I have received no promises,
assurances, or guarantees from anyone as to the results that may be obtained
by any medical treatment or services. If insurance coverage is insufficient,
denied altogether, or otherwise unavailable, the undersigned agrees to pay all
charges not paid by the insurer.
Patient/Patient Representative Signature:
Witness Signature and Title:
X

X

If you are not the Patient, please identify your
Relationship to the Patient.

Additional Witness Signature and Title:
(required for Patients unable to sign without a
representative or Patients who refuse to sign)

(Circle or mark relationship(s) from list
below):

X

Spouse
Parent
Legal Guardian
Neighbor/Friend
Sibling
Healthcare Power of Attorney
Guarantor
Other (please specify):
HCA Oklahoma COA-COS 10.01.2014

Conditions of Admission and Consent
for Outpatient Care - English (7/7)
Rev. 09/2014

