Gold Coast Health | Public Health Unit

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Queensland School Immunisation Program
Government CONSENT FORM YEAR7 AUSTRALIA PROGRAM
School Class
Student Details
aJrname
Given Names
Date of Birth / / Gender OMale OFemale
Medicare No. Reference No. on card
Home Address
anurb State Postcode

 

 

 

Does your child identify as either Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander? OYes O No
If yes, please select one of the following: OAboriginal OTorres Strait Islander (TSI) OBoth Aboriginal and TSI

IsEninsh yourfamily'smainlanguagespoken at home? OYes ONO

 

|fno,what languageisspoken? I

 

Parent/Legal Guardian Details

Relationship to student listed on thisform OParent OLegal Guardian

 

aJrname

 

 

 

Given Names

 

 

 

Phone(businesshours) Mobile

 

 

 

 

 

 

Email

 

 

 

 

Pre Vaccination Checklist (please tick any box that appliesto your child)

D has previously had a reaction to a vaccine D has a known medical condition

|:| faints when given an injection D can be highly anxious about vaccination
D has severe allergies D has special needs

D has received any vaccine recently D is pregnant

Please provide details below if you haveticked any of the above boxes.

 

 

Prior to administering the vaccine(s), the nurse immuniser will ask the student if the information above needs to be updated.
Please inform us of any changes as it may be some weeks between when you provide this information and your child receiving the vaccine(s).

 

 

 

Vaccination Consent Form lv2018

l d Gold Coast Health | Public Health Unit
Queens an School Immunisation Program
Government CONSENT FORM YEAR7 AUSTRALIA PROGRAM

   

CONSENT for Vaoci nation: parent/Iegal guardian to read and sign

 

lam authorised asthe parent or legal guardian of the listed child to give consent forthe child to be vaccinated. I have
read and lunderstand the information given to me about human papillomavirusvaccine and diphtheria-tetanus—
pertussisvaccine including risks and side effects.

I have been given the opportunity to discussthe risks and benefits of vaccination with my doctor or by telephoning the
Gold Coast Immunisation team on 1800 940 750 or 13 HEALTH (13 43 25 84).

lunderstand that Queensland Health will record immunisation details,forward them to the Australian Immunisation
Register and Vaccine monitoring service for the purpose of clinical follow up or disease prevention, control and
monitoring.

I understand that I can change my consent at any time. If I wish to change consent:

- up to 2 businessdaysbefore immunisation takesplace at the school, I understand lneed to do so by making awritten
request viaemail to Gold Coast Public Health Unit at immuniseGC@1ealth.qld.gov.au.

- within 2 businessdays of immunisation, I understand that I need to send a signed written request of changes with my
child to taketo the school immunisation team or alternatively I need to meet in person with the school immunisation
team to confirm that changesto my child's consent have been received.

 

 

 

For EACH vaccine please select either Yesor No

 

|Human Papillomavirus(HPV) vaccine (2 doses)

 

|:| YES, | Consent

|:| No, | Do Not Consent because:
0 my child will recieve vaccine from the family doctor Date: / /
O my child has already had HPV vaccination
O I do not want my child to be vaccinated

Parent/legal guardian signature:

 

|Diphtheria-Tetanus—Pertussis(whooping cough) dTpa vaccine (1 dose)

 

|:| YES, | Consent
E] No, | Do Not Consent because:

0 my child will recieve vaccine from the family doctor Date: / /

Parent/legal guardian signature:

0 my child has already had dTpa vaccination
O I do not want my child to be vaccinated

 

Office Use Only

 

Vaccine Pre VX check Arm Vaccine Batch No. Date Given Tlrne lmmuniser Name and Signature
completed dd/mm/yy Vaocmated

HPV1 DYDN CIR D'-

 

 

dTpa ElY El“ CIR |:|L

 

 

 

 

 

 

Notes:

 

HPV2 DYDN DR BL

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Notes:

 

 

 

Vaccination Consent Form lv2018

