Refusal to Consent to Child & Adolescent Vaccination: Birth through 18 years
This is a tool for provider practices to use for documentation in the patient’s medical record. This is not an
immunization waiver form. Contact your local health department for more information. Remember to document
vaccine refusal in the
Care Improvement Registry (
).
Child’s ID# or DOB:

Name of Child:
Name of Parent/Guardian:
My child’s health care provider,
(named above) should receive the following vaccines:
Recommended Vaccine

, has advised me that my child
Declined

Reason for Refusal

Diphtheria/Tetanus/Pertussis: DTaP
Diphtheria/Tetanus: DT or Td
Haemophilus influenzae type b: Hib
Hepatitis A: HepA
Hepatitis B: HepB
Human Papillomavirus: 9vHPV
Influenza
Measles/Mumps/Rubella: MMR
Meningococcal Conjugate: MenACWY
Meningococcal B: MenB
Pneumococcal Conjugate: PCV13
Pneumococcal Polysaccharide: PPSV23
Polio: IPV
Rotavirus: RV
Tetanus/diphtheria/pertussis: Tdap
Varicella (chickenpox): Var
Other:
I have read the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s (CDC) Vaccine Information Statement(s)
explaining the vaccine(s) and the disease(s) they prevent. My child’s health care provider has explained to me
and I understand the following:
• The purpose of the recommended vaccine(s).
• The risks of disease and the benefits and potential risks of the recommended vaccine(s).
• The possible consequence(s) of not allowing my child to receive the recommended vaccine(s) may
include contracting the illness the vaccine is intended to prevent and spreading the disease to others.
• My child’s health care provider, the American Academy of Pediatrics, the American Academy of Family
Physicians, the CDC, and the Michigan Department of Health and Human Services strongly
recommend that the vaccine(s) be given.
My child’s health care provider has answered all of my questions.
I know that I may change my mind and accept vaccination for my child in the future.
I accept sole responsibility for any consequences that result from my child not being vaccinated.
I acknowledge that I have read this document in its entirety and fully understand it.
____
Parent/Guardian Signature

Date

Witness

Date

____
Adapted from the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP)
Department of Health and Human Services – Division of Immunization

Rev.: 2/13/2018

