ORAL CONSCIOUS SEDATION CONSENT
For those children who are anxious, fearful, and unable to cooperate and/or for those children whose treatment may
require multiple visits that could cause undue stress and discomfort, the doctor may recommend that necessary
dental treatment be performed utilizing pediatric conscious sedation. Conscious sedation is achieved by having the
child swallow a liquid medication(s) that, after a short period of time, will minimally depress the child’s level of
consciousness. The child will independently maintain their ability to respond to verbal commands and physical
stimulation. The child will independently and continuously maintain all reflexes, airway, breathing, and cardiovascular
functions spontaneously and is continually monitored for compliance.
It has been discussed and described to me and I fully understand the following:
1. That a sedative medication(s) will be prescribed for my child by the doctor as deemed appropriate to enable the
doctor and staff to perform necessary dental treatment.
2. That the level of sedation using oral medication(s) prescribed may vary considerably from child to child. Some
children may be calm and quiet throughout the procedure while others may be fussy and cry. Although their level
of consciousness is depressed, the child will react to verbal commands and physical stimulation. Every effort will
be made to minimize any stress and discomfort from the procedure. Sedative medications often produce amnesic
effects where the child may have trouble recalling what happened while sedated or simply not remember.
3. That the possible medical risks of orally administered sedative drug(s) have been discussed and that I
understand these medical risks. These medical risks may include: drug allergy, airway and breathing difficulties,
and cardiovascular problems that can result in hospitalization, disabilities, and death. The safety of pediatric oral
conscious sedation has been well documented and is of utmost concern for the doctor and staff.
4. That it is imperative that my child did not have anything to eat or drink after midnight prior to the sedation
procedure.
5. That the benefits for using orally administered sedative drug(s) for sedation to allow my child to obtain needed
dental care have been explained.
6. That the alternatives to the use of oral sedative medication(s) may include but are not limited to: a) neglect of
dental care with possible pain and suffering; and b) use of deeper sedation methods such as intravenous
sedation or general anesthesia.
7. I will not leave the office during the time that my child is in the sedation room.
8. That my child may be irritable and agitated while waiting for the onset of the sedative effects. Drowsiness, lack of
coordination, inability to remain upright, etc., may occur in the office prior to treatment and that I will
supervise all activities during this period to prevent any injuries to my child.

9. That certain protective and physical positioning equipment and devices will be used during my child’s sedation
and dental procedures that minimize the movement of my child that could cause harm. These protective and
positioning devices include but are not limited to:
A)
B)
C)
D)
E)
F)

Body wrap (papoose board) and head immobilizer
Neck, elbow and knee positioners
Mouth opening devises (mouth prop)
Nitrous oxide mask and tubes
Tooth isolation devises (tooth clamp and rubber dam)
Monitoring probes and instruments

10. That certain behavior management and pain control methods may be employed such as voice control, nonverbal communications, nitrous oxide oxygen analgesia, and local anesthesia.
11. That certain complications may result from either the sedation procedure, the dental procedures, or both, and
may include but are not limited to: sweating, swallowing of a foreign object, lacerations of oral structures, mouth
numbness, post-treatment lip, tongue, or cheek biting, post-treatment swelling from local anesthesia, mouth
bleeding, nose bleeding, skin irritation, discoloration or bruising, nausea, vomiting, allergic reactions, loss of
bladder or bowel control, temporary elevated body temperature, and other conditions that may or may not
require hospitalization.
12. That I must supervise my child and all activities after the sedation appointment for at least 24 hours from
discharge. That an age appropriate car seat and seat belt will be used in compliance with state law when
transporting my child home from treatment. A responsible adult will be seated next to my child while my child is
being transported home to assure my child’s neck and head remain upright so that airway and breathing are not
impaired.
13. That I will comply with all preoperative and postoperative instructions given to me by the doctor and staff.
14. I have reviewed the Sedation Instructions Form and all of my questions regarding the procedure have been
answered.
I acknowledge that the above information has been described and discussed with me and that I have read (or it has
been read to me) and that I acknowledge and understand fully this informed consent for the use of pediatric oral
conscious sedation in the dental treatment of my child as discussed and described.
I acknowledge that it has been discussed and described to me and that I fully understand the need and use for
protective, physical restraint, and positioning devises, and other behavior management methods that are intended to
minimize any untoward movements during my child’s sedation appointment.
I acknowledge that I have been made aware of the risks, benefits, and alternatives to pediatric oral conscious
sedation, that potential hazards and problems were discussed in detail, and that I had the opportunity to ask
questions to the best of my ability and receive answers to those questions to the best ability of the doctor and staff.
I acknowledge and fully understand that the intention of pediatric sedation is to render my child minimally or
moderately sedated and not to render my child unconscious during dental treatment. I understand that no
guarantees or assurances have been made to me about the ultimate results of the above mentioned procedures. I
understand that this consent will remain in effect until terminated by me.

Parent's Name:

Relationship to child

Child's Name:

Date:
Signature:

