Addendum to HPV (Human
Papillomavirus) Vaccine
Vaccine Information Statement
1.	 I agree that the person named below will get the vaccine checked below.
2.	 I received or was offered a copy of the Vaccine Information Statement (VIS) for the vaccine listed above.
3.	 I know the risks of the disease this vaccine prevents.
4.	 I know the benefits and risks of the vaccine.
5.	 I have had a chance to ask questions about the disease the vaccine prevents, the vaccine, and how the vaccine is given.
6.	 I know that the person named below will have the vaccine put in his/her body to prevent the disease this vaccine prevents.
7.	 I am an adult who can legally consent for the person named below to get the vaccine. I freely and voluntarily give my
signed permission for this vaccine.
Vaccine to be given:

Human Papillomavirus (HPV) Vaccine

Information about person to receive vaccine (Please print)
Name: Last	
First	

Middle Initial

Birthdate
Sex
(mm/dd/yy) (circle one)
M

Address: Street

City

County

State

TX

F
Zip

Signature of person to receive vaccine or person authorized to make the request (parent or guardian):
x
x

Date:
Date:

Witness

PRIVACY NOTIFICATION - With few exceptions, you have the right to request and be informed about information that
the State of Texas collects about you.  You are entitled to receive and review the information upon request.  You also have the
right to ask the state agency to correct any information that is determined to be incorrect.  See http://www.dshs.texas.gov for
more information on Privacy Notification. (Reference: Government Code, Section 552.021, 552.023, 559.003, and 559.004)
Privacy Notice: I acknowledge that I have received a copy of my immunization provider’s HIPAA Privacy Notice.

For Clinic / Office Use Only
Clinic / Office Address:

Date Vaccine Administered:
Vaccine Manufacturer:
Vaccine Lot Number:
Site of Injection:
Title of Vaccine Administrator:
Signature of Vaccine Administrator:
Date VIS Given:

Notice: Alterations or changes to this publication is prohibited without the express written consent of the Texas Department
of State Health Services, Immunization Unit.
Instructions: File this consent statement in the patient’s chart.
Immunization Unit
C-116 (07/17)

CDC VIS Revision 12/02/2016

