Company Care ,
475-6656 t

Name: , I Date of Birth: - Age:

VARICELLA IMMUNIZATION CONSENT

 

YES NO

 

Are you sick right now With something more serious than a cold?

Do you have an immune deﬁciency disease (i. 6. cancer, leukemia, lymphoma, etc)?
Do you take medication, treatment or radiation for above diseases?

Do you have a family history of congenital or hereditary immunodeﬁciency?

Are you pregnant now or nursing or plan to become pregnant in the next three-(3)
months?

Have you ever had an allergic reaction to neomycin or gelatin?

Have you ever received a blood or plasma transfusion, immune globulin 0r varicella
zoster immune globulin (V ZIG) within the last 5 months?

8. Have you ever had a reaction to the varicella (chickenpox) vaccine?

 

 

 

 

SAPPN‘."

 

 

~19»

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

*NOTE: IF APPLICANT ANSWERED YES TO ANY OF QUESTIONS DO NOT ADMINISTER THE TEST REFER
APPLICANT TO PHYSICIAN

**Do NOT take aspirin or aspirin-containing products for 6 weeks after getting
vaccine due to risk of Reye’s Syndrome

I am aware that there may be soreness, redness, or swelling smounding the inj ection site. Having
answered the ab ova questions and received and reviewed the Vaccination Information Statement dated
3/13/08, I hereby give my consent to receive the varicelia vaccine. 1 release Company Care from all
responsibilities for reactions that may occur from this immunization.

 

?atient Signature Date

Varicella Vaccine 0.5 ml SuhQ

 

 

 

Review Consent, & Dose Site Date Lot # Exp‘ Date Nurse Sign
ViS Sheet

Varicella

#1

Variceila .

#2 '

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Next Due Date: 2‘“ dose is due 4-3 weeks after the initial dose

O:\CCGROUP\FORMSWaricalla Immunization Consent Formdoc
Revised: 5.03/13

 

 

CH 1C ?if N

2' ‘5. X VAC

 

 

(WHAT YOU NEED TO KNOW)

 

 

(1 Why get vaccinated? )

 

 

Chickenpox (also called varieella) is a common
childhood disease. It is usually mild, but it can be
serious, especially in young infants and adults.

' It causes a rash, itching, fever, and tiredness.

' It can lead to severe skin infection, scars,
pneumonia, brain damage} 01‘ death

' The chickenpox virus can be spread from person
to person through the air, or by contact with ﬂuid
from chickenpox blisters.

' A person who has had chickenpox can get a
painful rash called shingles years later.

‘ Before the vaccine, about 11 ,000 people were
hospitalized for chickenpox each year in the
United States.

' Before the vaccine, about 100 people died each year
as a result of chickenpox in the United States.

Chickenpox vaccine can prevent chickenpox.

Most people who get chickenpox vaccine will not get

chickenpox. But if someone who has been vaccinated

does get Chickenpox, it is usually very mild, They
will have fewer blisters, are less likely to have a fever,
and will recover fasten

 

vaccine and when?

 

 

Routine

Children who have never had chickenpox should get 2

doses of chickenpox vaccine at these ages:
lst Dose: 12—15 months of age

211d Dose: 4-6 years of age (may be given earlier,
if at least 3 months after the lst dose)

People 13 years of age and older (who have never had

chickenpox or received chickenpox vaccine) should
get two doses at least 28 days apart.

(2 Who should get chickenpox >

 

 

Chickenpox 3/13108

 

 

Catch-Up

Anyone who is not fully vaccinated, and never had
chickenpox, should receive one 01' two doses of
chickenpox vaccine. The timing of these doses
depends on the person’s age. Ask your provider,

Chickenpox vaccine may be given at the same time
as other vaccines.

Note: A “combination” vaccine called MMRV,
which contains both chickenpox and MMR vac—
cines, may be given instead of the ﬁve individual
vaccines to people 12 years of age and younger.

3 Some people should not get
chickenpox vaccine or should wait

' People should not get chickenpox vaccine if they
have ever had a life-threatening allergic reaction
to a previous dose of chickenpox vaccine or to
gelatin 01' the antibiotic neomycin.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

' People who are moderately or severely ill at the
time the shot is scheduled should usually wait
until they recover before getting chickenpox
vaccine.

- Pregnant women should wait to get chickenpox
vaccine untii after they have given birth. Women
should not get pregnant for 1 month after getting
chickenpox vaccine.

' Some people should check with their doctor about
Whether they should get chickenpox vaccine,
including anyone who:

— Has HIV/AIDS or another disease that affects
the immune system

— Is being treated with drugs that affect the
immune system, such as steroids, for 2 Weeks or
longer

- Has any kind of cancer

- Is getting cancer treatment with radiation or
drugs

0 People who recently had a transfusion or were

given other blood products should ask their
doctor when they may get chickenpox vaccine.

Ask your provider for more information.

 

 

4 What are the risks from
chickenpox vaccine?
A vaccine, like any medicine, is capable of causing
serious problems, such as severe allergic reactions.
The risk of chickenpox vaccine causing serious harm,

or death, is extremely small.

 

Getting chickenpox vaccine is much safer than
getting chickenpox disease. Most people who get
chickenpox vaccine do not have any problems with it.
Reactions are usually more likely after the first dose
than after the second.

Mild Problems

° Soreness or swelling where the shot was given
(about 1 out ofS children and up to 1 out of}
adolescents and adults)

' Fever (1 person out of 10, or less)

' Mild rash, up to a month after vaccination (1
person out of 25). It is possible for these people to
infect other members of their household, but this
is extremely rare.

Moderate Problems

' Seizure (jerking 01' staring) caused by fever (very
rare).

Severe Probtems
' Pneumonia (very rare)

Other serious problems, including severe brain reac-
tions and low blood count, have been reported after
chickenpox vaccination, These happen so rarely
experts cannot tell whether they are caused by the
vaccine or not. If they are, it is extremely rare.

Note: The ﬁrst dose of MMRV vaccine
has been associated with rash and higher
rates of fever than MMR and varicella
vaccines given separately. Rash has been
reported in about 1 person in 20 and fever
in about 1 person in S.

Seizures caused by a fever are also reported
more often after MMRV. These usually
occur 5-12 days after the ﬁrst dose.

 

 

 

 

What if there is a moderate or
severe reaction?

 

(5

What should I look for?

' Any unusual condition, such as a high fever,
weakness, or behavior changes. Signs of a serious

allergic reaction can include difﬁculty breathing,
hoarseness or wheezing, hives, paleness, Weakness,
a fast heart beat or dizziness.

What should I do?

' Call a doctor, or get the person to a doctor right
away.

' Tell your doctor What happened, the date and time
it happened, and when the vaccination was given.

° Ask your provider to report the reaction by filing a
Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS)
form.

01' you can ﬁle this report through the VAERS
website at www.vaers.hhs.gov, or by calling
1-800-822-7967.

VAERS does not provide medical advice.

(6

A federal program has been created to help people
who may have been harmed by a vaccine.

 

The National Vaccine Injury
Compensation Program

D

 

For details about the National Vaccine Injury
Compensation Program, call 1-800-338-2382 or visit
their website at
www.hrsa.govlvaccinecompensation.

(7

' Ask your provider. They can give you the
vaccine package insert or suggest other sources of
information. '

 

How can I learn more?

 

' Call your local or state health department.

' Contact the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC):
- Call 1-800-232-4636 (1-800-CDC-INFO)
- Visit CDC website at: www.cdc.gov/vaccines

sure:
’1‘ v 1,.

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVIGES
CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL AND PREVENTION

o
*1

51 um!»

  

 

Vaccine Information Statement (Interim)
Varicella Vaccine (3/13/08) 42 U.S.C. §300aa-26

 

 

 

 

