Tischler Dental

(845)679-3706
mail@tischlerdental.com

121 Roule 375

www.tischlerdental.com

Woodstock NY 12498

Discussion and Consent for Extraction
I am being provided this information and consent form so I may better understand the treatment recommended for me.
Before beginning, I want to be provided with enough information, in a way I can understand, to make a well informed and
confident decision regarding my treatment.
I understand the I may ask any questions I wish, and that it is better to ask before the treatment begins than to wonder
about it after treatment has started.

Nature of extraction
It has been recommended that I have the following tooth (teeth) extracted:

Extraction involves the complete removal of a tooth from the mouth. Some extractions may require cutting into the gums
and removing supporting bone/ or cutting the the tooth into sections prior to removal.
This recommendation is based on visual examination(s), on x-rays, model, photos, and other diagnostic test taken, and
on my doctor's knowledge of my medical and dental history.

My needs and wants have also been taken into

consideration.
The extraction is necessary because of:

LJ Paln

lJ Infection

LJ Periodontal (gum) disease

lJ oecay

LJ Broken Tooth/Teeth

lJ Tooth is Non-restorable

LJ Other

_______
_

The intended benefit of extraction is to relieve my symptoms and/or permit me to continue with any additional treatment
my dentist has proposed.

The prognosis, or chance of success, of this extraction is:

Page 1of3

Tischler Dental

(845)679-3706
mail@lischlerdental.com

121 Route375

www.tischlerdental.com

Woodstock NY 12498
My extraction(s) is (are) estimated to cost$

Expected visit(s) required to complete this treatment:

Alternatives to Extraction
Depending on my diagnosis, there may or may not be an alternative to extraction that involves other types of dental care.

The tooth CAN be retained/restored by:
L..J Root Canal therapy

LJ Filling

lJ Periodontal treatment

Other treatment (specify):

The tooth CANNOT be retained/restored. Extraction is the any reasonalbe treatment option.
uves

uNo

I have had an opportunity to ask questions about these alternatives and any other treatments

I have heard or thought

about, including:

LJ I have been informed and fully understand that there are certain inherent and potential risks associated with any type
of surgical procedure, including extractions. I understand that during and following treatment I may experience pain or
discomfort, bleeding, swelling bruising, and stiff jaw, all of which could last for several days.

I understand that it is

possible for an infection to occur in the extraction site and that I may need antibiotics and/or other procedures to treat
the infection.

I understand that less common complications include: Dry socket (lost blood clot), loss or loosening of

dental restorations, loss or inury to adjacent teeth and soft tissues, jaw fractures. sinus exposure (related to upper
teeth only), swallowing or aspiration of teeth and restorations.

LJ I

understand that small root fragments may break off from the tooth being extracted.

Depending on their size and

position they may either remain in the jaw or may require additional surgery for removal.

LJ I

understand that during surgery it may be impossible to avoid touching, moving stretching, or injuring the nerves in

my jaw that control sensations and function in my lips,

tongue, chin, teeth, and mouth.

This may result in nerve

disturbances such as temporary numbness, itching, burning, or tingling of the lip, tongue. chin, teeth, and/or mouth
tissue.

Page 2 of3

