(845)679-3706

Tischler Dental

mail@tischlerdental.com
121 Route

375

www.tischlerdental.com

Woodstock NY 12498

Informed Consent for Dental Treatment

I hereby authorize Tischler Dental and its licensed providers to treat me or the person under my care (I am the legal
guardian, or close relative) with the following dental procedures (if or when needed): prophylaxis (dental cleaning),
restorations (fillings), crowns (caps), fixed bridgework (a series of joined caps), full or partial removable dentures,
cosmetic dentistry, extraction (tooth removal), non-surgical and/or surgical treatment of the gums, root canal, Dental
Implants, Bone Grafting, all emergency services and any other treatment the dentist considers necessary to create better
health for my mouth.
Dentistry is not an exact science and reputable practitioners cannot properly guarantee results. Despite the most diligent
care and precaution, unanticipated complications or unintended results, although rare, may occur. A treatment plan is
based on the best evidence available during the examination. There is no guarantee that this plan will not change. During
treatment, it may be necessary to change or add procedures because of conditions that were not evident during
examination, but were found during the course of treatment. For example, root canal treatment may be needed during
routine restorative procedures. Any change in treatment plan may result in additional fees.
Guarantees and assurances cannot be made by anyone regarding the dental treatment which you have requested and
authorized. It is essential that you keep your appointments and cooperate in your treatment to help insure the best
possible result.
The licensed provider at Tischler Dental has fully explained to me the nature and purpose of the procedure(s), and has
also explained the expected benefits and potential risks (from known and unknown causes) of the treatment. I have been
given alternatives to the treatment, the risks and benefits of the alternatives and the consequences of having treatment
withheld. I have been given the opportunity to ask questions, and all of my questions have been answered fully and
satisfactorily.
I understand that during treatment, unforeseen conditions may arise which may necessitate procedures different from
those discussed prior to treatment. I therefore consent to the performance of any additional treatment which the dentist
considers necessary.
I consent to the use of a local anesthetic (Often known as Novocain), antibiotics and analgesics (pain medication) and
have been explained all potential risks associated with their use. I understand that there is a slight element of risk
involved with the use of local anesthesia or the use of any drug. These risks include allergic reaction, aspiration, pain,
cardiac arrest, discoloration and injury to blood vessels and nerves which may be caused by injections of any
medications or drugs. Injection of a local anesthetic can at times, although rarely, cause temporary or permanent nerve
damage.
I consent to the use of nitrous oxide analgesia, and have been informed of the risks and benefits of its use.

Page 1 of2

