Division of Genetics
GENETIC TESTING INFORMED CONSENT
I,

, agree to participate / allow my child to participate in testing

for
, which may
include a DNA-based test. I understand that a sample of blood will be drawn from me/my child by venipuncture, a
procedure which carries very little risk. I understand that the blood will be used for the purpose of attempting to
determine if I/ my child is a carrier of, is affected with, or is at future increased risk to be affected with this / these
genetic condition (s).
I understand that:
1.

In most cases, a DNA test directly detects an abnormality (mutation) in a gene. These tests are highly sensitive
and specific. However, due to limitations in existing technology or to incomplete knowledge of possible
disease-causing mutations and /or disease-related genes, a mutation may not be detected in me / my child
even if affected by this disease. In such cases, either the percentage of mutations detectable by the test or
the remaining risk of having a disease–causing mutation will be discussed with me when the test results are
reported. Some genetic testing may return with a result of uncertain significance. If this were to occur, my/my
child’s doctor will explain this in detail or refer me/my child to genetic counseling.

2. An error in interpretation of the test may occur if the true biologic relationships of the family members involved
in testing are not as I have stated. In addition, testing may inadvertently detect non-paternity (that the stated
father is not truly the biologic father).
3.

Although testing is quite accurate, there is a very low error rate even in the best laboratories (1 in 1000). An
error in diagnosis can lead to incorrect diagnosis for other relatives.

4.

Because of the complexity of DNA based testing and the important implications of the test results, all results
will be reported to me only by my physician or genetic counselor. The results are confidential.
They should only be released to my/ my child’s:
D primary care physician
D referring physician
D additional physicians:

5.

The blood provided will not be used for future clinical studies or research purposes without my written
consent.

6.

My signature acknowledges voluntary participation in the above testing, but in no way releases the laboratory
and staff from their professional and ethical responsibility to me.

Patient Signature (Name if Minor)

Parent Signature (if needed)

Witness Signature

Date

Physician or Counselor’s Statement: I have explained DNA testing to this individual, including the limitations
outlined above, and have answered all questions.

Physician/Counselor
14203 6/05

Date

