College of Dentistry
Consent for Complete Dentures
Time Frame
I understand that at least 6-8 appointments will be required to fabricate my dentures, starting with the first
appointment to make diagnostic casts. If there have been recent tooth extractions, I understand that
denture fabrication cannot begin until a minimum of 8 weeks following tooth removal to allow for
adequate healing time. Additional appointments may be required for denture relines or remakes.
Possible Delays
I am aware that there may be delays in the fabrication and delivery of my dentures due to:
 The need for additional healing time (8 weeks or more is the recommended healing time) due to
my own individual healing response.
 The need for additional surgeries (i.e., alveoloplasty and tuberosity procedures) which will require
additional healing time.
 Holidays and academic breaks.
 Scheduling conflicts in obtaining a prosthodontic screening and other appointments.
Difficulties and Problems with Wearing Dentures
The difficulties and problems associated with wearing dentures have been presented to me, along with my
treatment plan. These issues include, but are not limited to:
 Difficulties with speaking and/or eating
 Food under dentures
 Functional problems
 Loose dentures
 Lack of retention
 Need for adhesives
 Feeling of fullness
 Saliva production
o Certain medications may decrease the amount of saliva produced resulting in an increase in
sore spots and more difficulties adapting to the dentures.
o Some denture patients may experience an excessive amount of saliva initially but this
usually returns to normal.
 Effect(s) of poor ridge shape and form.
 The need for future relines and remakes of either immediate or conventional dentures.
Immediate Dentures
I have been provided written information about immediate dentures and understand:
 Immediate dentures are transitional dentures and must be relined or remade, usually about three to
six months following insertion.
 Fees for required laboratory relines or remakes of immediate dentures are NOT INCLUDED
in the immediate denture fee.
 Minor adjustments and temporary (tissue conditioning) relines may be required with immediate
dentures and are included in the immediate denture fee, but only for a period of 6 months.

Immediate Dentures vs. Conventional Dentures
Immediate denture procedures involve insertion of a denture on the same day as the remaining front teeth
are extracted. Fabrication of conventional dentures is usually delayed 8-12 weeks after removal of all
remaining teeth. I understand that the advantages of delayed denture (conventional) fabrication are:
 Relines or remakes may not be required as soon as with immediate dentures.
 There are generally fewer adjustments as compared to immediate dentures.
 The fee for a conventional denture is lower than for an immediate denture.
Denture Relines and Remakes
I understand that:
 Dentures made 8 weeks after tooth removal still may need to be relined or remade before
one year due to continued bone resorption (shrinkage) of the ridges. This is especially true for a
patient with a history of smoking and/or periodontal disease or extensive oral surgery associated
with tooth removal.
 There will be a charge for any laboratory relines or remakes determined necessary due to
continued ridge resorption (shrinkage) or bone loss following delayed construction of dentures.
Benefits of Longer Healing Time for Denture Wearers
A longer healing time after tooth extraction and before denture fabrication is started (longer than 8 weeks)
is preferable. Patients who have dentures made 6 months or more following tooth loss rarely need
relines or remakes during the first year of wearing new dentures. However, there is no guarantee that a
reline or remake of the denture will not be required due to continued bone resorption. I understand that:
 I will be charged for a reline or denture remake when it is required due to the continued
physiologic bone resorption of the ridge
 The average denture usually requires a laboratory reline or remake at least once every four years
due to functional wear and/or continued bone resorption.
 I have been informed that this bone resorption will continue throughout my lifetime making
subsequent denture construction more difficult, less satisfying, and less comfortable for me
than my previous denture experience.
Patient Expectations for Dentures
 The College of Dentistry cannot guarantee a patient will be able to successfully and comfortably
wear a well constructed denture. The College of Dentistry promises to do the best job they can for
the oral condition that exists in my mouth.
 I have been told that dentures should not be considered a replacement for teeth, but a
replacement for no teeth. I am aware that dentures are not real teeth. I am also aware that at
best, I will end up with about 15-20% efficiency as compared to my natural teeth.
 I understand that after adjustments are completed I should return to the College for a yearly recall
(this is a separate cost.)
PATIENT CONSENT
I have been fully informed of the fees and problems associated with complete dentures, the alternative
treatments available, and the necessity for follow-up care. I have had an opportunity to ask any questions
I may have in connection with the treatment and fees and to discuss my concerns with my student dentist
and/or supervising dentist. After thorough consideration, I consent to complete dentures as presented to
me during consultation and in the treatment plan presentation.
I CERTIFY THAT I HAVE READ AND FULLY UNDERSTAND THIS DOCUMENT.
Date

Signature of Patient

Date

Signature of Witness

