Informed Consent for Genetic Testing
**This form does not need to be returned to the Medical Genomics Laboratory if Informed Consent portion of the Test Request form has been signed.***

I hereby consent for:
Name:

DOB:

Gender:

To participate in genetic testing for the following RNA/DNA-based cascade of tests ordered by my physician at the University of
Alabama at Birmingham (UAB) Medical Genomics Laboratory (MGL):
Genetic Tests:

I understand that:
1. Any biological samples submitted for genetic testing (e.g., blood, cheek cells, saliva, amniotic fluid, chorionic villi, tumor, and/or
tissue) will be removed from me and/or my minor child(ren) using standard techniques which carry their associated risks.
2. Any samples obtained will be used for the purpose of attempting to determine if I and/or members of my family carry genetic
changes in the disease genes ordered by my physician.
3. The genetic tests performed at the MGL are the most sensitive developed and are highly specific. However, sensitivity and
specificity are test-dependent. Additional testing details and the specific detection rates of each test can be found at
www.genetics.uab.edu/medgenomics.
4. The following are possible outcomes for the specific tests listed above:
Positive

Unknown Significance

Negative

This is an indication that I may be predisposed
to or have the specific disease, or condition
tested. Further testing may be needed to
confirm the diagnosis.

There may be a possibility that the laboratory
findings will be ambiguous or of unknown
significance. This may require additional
testing from me or my family members. In
rare circumstances, findings may be
suggestive of a condition different than the
diagnosis that was originally made.

There is a chance that I will still have this
genetic condition even though the genetic test
results are negative. Due to limitations in
technology and incomplete knowledge of
genes, some changes in RNA/DNA or protein
products that cause disease may not be
detected by this test.

5. In other cases, the RNA/DNA test is unable to identify an abnormality although the abnormality may still exist. This event may be
due to incomplete knowledge of the gene structure or an inability of current technology to identify certain types of mutations in the
gene. When clinically necessary, the MGL may use a method called linkage analysis. This method is not a direct test, but will report
the probability that you and/or family members have an inherited disease or disorder. In some families, the markers used in linkage
analysis may be uninformative. If so, linkage testing cannot provide results for the family members in question.
6. The RNA/DNA analysis performed by the MGL is specific for the genetic test listed above and in no way guarantees my health or
the health of my living or unborn children. The MGL cannot be responsible for an erroneous clinic diagnosis made elsewhere.
7. The tests performed at the MGL are expanded and improved continuously. The tests offered are not considered research but are
considered the best and newest laboratory service that can be offered. Genetic testing is complex and utilizes specialized materials so
there is always some very small possibility that the test will not work properly or that an error will occur. There is a low error rate
(perhaps 1 in 1000 samples) even in the best laboratories. Additionally, in very rare instances, this test may reveal an important
genetic change that is not directly related to the clinical reason for ordering this test. This would be considered an incidental finding.
The MGL reserves the right to report these incidental findings if they are clinically relevant to the patients and/or their families In such
instances, these results will be discussed with my healthcare provider and additional testing may be recommended. My signature
acknowledges my voluntary participation in this test, but in no way releases the laboratory and staff from the MGL from their
professional or ethical responsibility to me.
8. The MGL does not return DNA samples to individuals or physicians. While the MGL is not a specimen banking facility, in some
cases it may be possible for the laboratory to reanalyze my remaining DNA upon request. The request for additional studies must be
ordered by my referring physician/counselor and there will be an additional fee.

9. An aliquot of my DNA/RNA may be used for validation, educational and/or research purposes. For some molecular genetic tests, a
synopsis of clinical information and test results may be included in HIPAA-compliant, de-identified public databases as part of the
National Institute of Health’s effort to improve diagnostic testing and our understanding of the relationships between genetic changes
and clinical symptoms. If I would like to opt out of participation, I can contact the MGL via email at medgenomics@uab.edu or
calling the laboratory at 205-934-5562.
10. Because of the complexity of genetic testing and the important implications of the test results, results will only be reported to me
through a physician, genetic counselor, or a certified genetics professional. The results are confidential to the extent allowed by law.
They will only be released to other medical professionals or other parties with my written consent or as otherwise allowed by law.
Participation in testing is completely voluntary.
11. For Prenatal Testing: If prenatal diagnosis is being performed, fetal cells obtained by chorionic villus sampling or amniocentesis
will be used. In order to perform accurate prenatal diagnosis, biological samples are required for the fetus as well as from the affected
individual in the family and from the biological mother.
12. I and/or my physician/counselor have signed the informed consent portion of the test order form indicating that we have discussed
the items on this document and I will also receive a copy of this consent form.

Subject’s Signature

Date

Please Print Subject’s Name

Physician’s Signature

Date

Please Print Physician’s Name

Assent of Parent

Date

Genetic Counselor’s Signature

Date

Assent of Child

Date

Please Print Genetic Counselor’s Name

