_|

SPECIAL CONSENT FOR PROCEDURAL TREATMENT
(DIAGNOSTIC & SURGICAL PROCEDURES & OTHER INVASIVE PROCEDURES)

 

 

The law in Washington gives you the right and the responsibility to make decisions about your health care. Health care professionals can give you
information and advice. You or your legal representative must be part of the decision-making. This consentform:

- Proves that you had a part in making decisions about your health care.

- Shows that you gave permission for the treatment recommended by your health care professionals.

The words “I”, “my", etc., in this form mean the patient, no matter whether the patient or the patient's representative is signing the form.
The term “health care professional” may mean the attending physician, but in addition may mean a different doctor (including a
resident), nurse practitioner, registered nurse, or physician's assistant, who orders, performs all or part of, or is involved in explaining

the procedure.

 

 

I give permission to my health care professional(s) who are listed on the back of this form as the performing provider(s), to
do the procedure(s) listed on the back of this form, with anesthesia and/or sedation if that is needed. Anesthesia or sedation
medicine will be given by the health care professional, anesthesiologist, or other trained health care staff who work under
appropriate supervision.

I understand that the health care professional may need to perform other urgent procedures due to an emergency that may
occur while I am sedated or otherwise not able to give consent. The health care professional will talk with my legally
authorized representative if possible, but if it is not, I give my permission for the health care professional to do so.

I understand that the health care professional may choose assistants, including residents (physicians who have finished
medical school, but are getting more training), to do or help with procedures. The assistants may suture; harvest grafts;
dissect, remove or alter tissue; implant devices; or do other tasks that the health care professional has discussed with me as
applicable. If known, the health care professional has discussed with me whether there will be assistants and who s/he
expects the assistants to be. I understand that during the procedure, the health care professional may need to choose
different assistants or have them do different tasks. I understand that for some kinds of medical equipment used during
procedures, a representative from the equipment manufacturer may be there, doing things like providing consultation or
running checks on the equipment.

The hospital or health care professional will dispose of any removed tissues or parts.

I understand what procedure will be done. I have been told about the risks and benefits. l have been told about other
treatment choices and about their risks and benefits, including not having the procedure. l have been told about what results
to expect, which includes information about the chances for the expected results. I know that results cannot be guaranteed.

I understand that there are risks for all kinds of surgery and for “invasive procedures" (procedures where a blood vessel,
body cavity, or other internal tissue is entered with a needle, tube, or similar device). These risks, which can be serious,
include bleeding, infection, and damage to nearby tissues, vessels, nerves, or organs. They may even result in paralysis,
cardiac arrest, brain damage, and/or death.

I have received this added detailed information and/or patient information materials about the procedure(s):
ACOG 2012 FAQ: Labor Induction

 

Print added information or title of information materials

I understand whether I will receive either anesthesia or sedation medicine, or both. l have been told about my choices
for anesthesia and sedation and about their risks and benefits. l have been told about side effects of the medicine(s) and
problems they may cause with recovery.

I understand that anesthesia and sedation medicines used for procedures involve risks. These risks can be serious. They
may include damage to vital organs such as the brain, heart, lungs, liver, and kidneys. They may even result in paralysis,
cardiac arrest, brain damage, and/or death.

I understand that the anesthesia equipment may damage my teeth or cause other dental damage.

I understand that nerve damage may occur from how anesthesia equipment is placed or how my body must be positioned
during a procedure.

I understand that I am free to refuse consent to any proposed procedure.
Continued on Reverse

 

PT NO UW Medicine
' Harborview Medical Center — UW Medical Center
Northwest Hospital & Medical Center — University of Washington Physicians
Seattle, Washington
NAME SPECIAL CONSENT FOR PROCEDURAL TREATMENT
DOB *UO173*

UH0173 REV APR 12

_|

BLOOD: I have been told whether I am having a procedure where blood or blood components (products) may need to be
used (also known as transfused). lfl am having this kind of procedure, l have been told about side effects, risks and
other choices about transfusion, including not getting a transfusion.

 

I give permission to receive blood and/or blood components if the health care team decides it is needed. I understand
that use of blood and blood components involves risks. The risks may include reactions, including allergic reactions, fever,
hives, lung injury, and in rare cases, infectious diseases such as hepatitis and HIV/AIDS. I know that the blood bank
screens donors and matches blood for transfusions to help lower risks.

Q (Please initial) I refuse (or partially refuse) permission for blood and blood components. (You will be
asked to sign another form, Form UH2063).

 

 

 

 

El Interpreter (Print Name)

Giving Consent

By signing below, I confirm that] have read the sections above and that I have had 1) each item explained to me; 2) a
chance to ask questions; and 3) all of my questions answered.

FULL NAME OF
PROCEDURE(S) InductionlAugmentation of Labor

 

 

 

Health Care
Professional (5)
Performing Procedure

 

 

SIGNATURE (PATIENT 0R PATIENT’S AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE) PRINT NAME DATE TIME

 

 

 

 

IF SIGNED BY PERSON OTHER THAN THE PATIENT, CHECK RELATIONSHIP TO PATIENT:

El 1. Court-appointed Guardian El 2. Durable Healthcare Power of Attorney El 3. Spouse/registered domestic partner
El 4. Adult Chi|d(ren) El 5. Parent(s) El 6. Adult Brother(s)/Sister(s)
FOR MINOR PATIENTS:

El 1. Guardian/Iegal custodian El 2. Court—authorized person for child in out-of-home placement El 3. Parent(s)
El 4. Holder of signed authorization from parent(s) El 5. Adult representing self to be a relative responsible for the minor’s health

WITNESS SIGNATURE (WITNESS OPTIONAL UNLESS TELEPHONE CONSENT) PRINT NAME EITELEPHONE MONITORED
CONSENT
(No patient signature)

 

 

 

 

 

 

HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONAL’S STATEMENT

I explained the treatment/procedure(s) stated on this form, including the possible risks, complications, alternative treatments (including non-
treatment) and anticipated results to the patient and/or his/her representative before the patient and/or his/her representative consented.

If only the patient has signed this form, in my clinical opinion, the patient is capable of making his/her own health care decisions. If in my clinical
opinion, the (adult) patient has questionable ability to make his/her own health care decisions, I discussed the above with the patient and with the
patient’s legally authorized representative.

 

HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONAL SIGNATURE PRINT NAME & TITLE NPI (|FAPPLICABLE) DATE TIME

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

UW Medicine

Harborview Medical Center — UW Medical Center

Northwest Hospital & Medical Center — University of Washington Physicians
Seattle, Washington

SPECIAL CONSENT FOR PROCEDURAL TREATMENT

*U0173*

|_ UHO173 REV APR 12 BACK

PT.NO

NAME

DOB

