2017-2018 Informed Consent to Receive Vaccines

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

First N ame: Last N ame: Date of Birth:
Street Address:
City: State: Zip:
Phone: ( ) Mobile/Land line (circle one) Male/Female (circle one)
Drug Allergies
Physician: Physician Phone: 1 )
Physician Address:
When did you PneumovaX Date / / I haven’t received
last receive Inﬂuenza Date / / I haven’t received
the following Tetanus Date / / I haven’t received
vaccines? ZostavaX Date / / I haven’t received
Prevnar Date / / I haven’t received
Other Date / / I haven’t received

 

 

MEDICARE / INSURANCE INFORMATION

Immunizations may or may not be covered by your prescription insurance. To be eligible to receive ﬂu vaccination at no
charge at the pharmacy you must have traditional Medicare Part B, Railroad Medicare Card, or select Medicare HMO
plans. If you have a Medicare HMO plan, it must be a plan that has contracted with us to provide immunizations. We
will need to verify eligibility with the plan for all immunizations. If we are unable to confirm eligibility, you may need
to receive the vaccination from your physician OR you may elect to pay for it yourself to receive it at our pharmacy.
Please provide your insurance billing and patient information below. You must list your name exactly as it appears on
your Medicare or insurance card. Please provide the date of birth and street address that Medicare or your insurance has
on file for you.

Incorrect information can result in Medicare or your HMO rejecting payment. If Medicare or your HMO plan does not
cover the immunization, you will be required to pay for the immunization.

Insurance name (Medicare, Senior Dimensions, etc.):

 

Group #: ID # (include any letters):

Please initial that you have read and understand the information above

 

 

 

I have read, or have had read to me, the provided Vaccine Information Statement(s) (“VIS”). I have had the opportunity to ask questions about the
vaccine(s), and all my questions have been answered to my satisfaction. I understand the beneﬁts and risks of the vaccine(s). I consent to the
administration of the vaccine(s) requested. I authorize this information to be forwarded to my primary care physician, the authorizing physician, or the
local Dept. of Health, if applicable. I agree to stay in the general area for 15 minutes after receiving my vaccination in case any immediate reactions
occur. I understand that if I experience any side effects, I am responsible for following up with my physician at my expense. On behalf of myself, my
heirs, and my personal representatives, I hereby release the pharmacy that is administering the vaccine(s); SUPERVALU INC.; the subsidiaries and
afﬁliates of SUPERVALU INC.', the respective directors, ofﬁcers, employees, and agents of SUPERVALU INC. and its subsidiaries and afﬁliates; and
the owner and/or operator of the clinic site and its directors, ofﬁcers, employees, and agents from any and all liability that might arise from this
vaccination.

By providing my home, work and/or cellular telephone number, I authorize Supervalu, Inc. and its agents to contact me at the number(s) provided,
including by calling or texting me using an autodialer or pre-recorded messages, to communicate with me about any ofthe pharmacy products or
services thatI have received from Supervalu, Inc. This includes, but is not limited to, contacting me about reﬁll reminders and when future vaccines
are due for administration. I understand that message and data rates may apply and that I will have the option of stopping or opting-out of receiving
future messages. I understand that I am not required to allow Supervalu, Inc. and its agents to contact me at the number(s) provided above in order to
purchase products or services from Supervalu, Inc.

 

Please initial that you received our
HIPAA Notice of Privacy Practices

 

(initials)

 

 

Patient Signature Date

 

 

Please answer yes or no to the questions below. If any questions are unclear, please ask for help.

_<

es

ewe N lueued

1 Do you have a fever, diarrhea, or vomiting today?

Are you allergic to eggs, Baker’s yeast, preservatives (i‘e‘ sulﬁtes), thimerosal,
streptomycin, neomycin, Arginine, gelatin or latex?

3 Have you ever had a severe reaction to any vaccine Which required medical care?

4 Are you or anyone in your home, or anyone you take care ofbeing treated With
chemotherapy, radiation for cancer, have HIV/AIDS or any immune deﬁciency
disorder?

Do you have a long—term health problem such as heart disease, lung disease,

 

asthma, kidney disease, diabetes, or blood disorders?

Have you had Immune (gamma) Globulin or a transfusion ofblood or plasma in
the past year?

7 Have you had Guillain—Barre Syndrome, a condition Which causes paralysis?

8 Are you taking any blood—thinning medications (i‘e‘ aspirin, warfarin, etc)?

/

9 Are you on immunosuppressive therapy, including high—dose corticosteroids?

10 Have you received any vaccines in the past 4 weeks?

DDDDDDDDDDD
DDUDDDDDDDD?
8001119de

11 For women: Are you pregnant or planning pregnancy in the next month?

 

 

 

NOTE: The pharmacist will review these questions with you before giving the immunization. Based on your answers, they may
refer you to speak with your physician to make sure the vaccine is right for you.

VACCINE INFORMATION (Ofﬁce use only)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Vaccine Lot # Exp. Date Manufacturer Dose (ml)
Right or Left Arm
Route Admin. Site Admin / VIS given date VIS publication date
ADMINISTRATOR" STORE # (Where pt received vaccine)
Vaccine Lot # Exp. Date Manufacturer Dose (ml)
Right or Left Arm
Route Admin. Site Admin / VIS given date VIS publication date
ADMINISTRATOR" STORE # (Where pt received vaccine)

 

 

*By signing as administrator you are conﬁrming that contraindications and side effects have been reviewed and a current VIS was
provided to the patient receiving vaccine.

