THE CANCER GENOME ATLAS (TCGA) 
SUGGESTED INFORMED CONSENT LANGUAGE 
FOR PROSPECTIVE COLLECTIONS 
 2011 
Purpose of the Project 
 
We would like to ask your permission to include you in a research project called The 
Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA).  The purpose of the TCGA project is to discover genetic 
changes associated with cancer.  This knowledge should lead to better ways to prevent, 
detect, and treat cancer and, perhaps, other diseases as well.  This project is being 
sponsored by the National Cancer Institute (NCI) and the National Human Genome 
Research Institute (NHGRI).  The NCI and the NHGRI are both part of the US 
government agency known as the National Institutes of Health (NIH). 
 
Body tissues are made up of cells.  Cells contain DNA, which is part of your unique 
genetic material that carries the instructions for your body’s development and function.  
Cancer can result from changes in a person’s genetic material that causes cells to divide 
in an uncontrolled way and, sometimes, to travel to other organs.  Currently, researchers 
and doctors know some of the genetic changes that can cause cancer, but they do not 
know all of them.   
 
The TCGA project is designed to try to identify all of the genetic changes that can cause 
cancer in people.  Therefore, since you are having surgery to remove a cancer, we would 
like to study the genetic and biochemical material from your cancer tissue as part of the 
TCGA.  We will compare the genetic and biochemical material from your cancer tissue 
to the genetic and biochemical material from your normal tissue to find the differences 
that exist.  By combining this information with information from your medical records, it 
may be possible to identify the genetic changes that are associated with your particular 
type of cancer.  We will perform this same process with many hundreds of other people 
who have also volunteered to be in this research project.  By studying many different 
kinds of cancer in this way, we expect to identify most of the genetic changes associated 
with different kinds of cancer.  Since we will combine genetic and biochemical 
information with information from medical records, such as how cancers respond to 
different kinds of treatments, this project could lead to more knowledge about why 
certain cancers respond differently or don’t respond at all.  With such knowledge, future 
treatments could become customized to a patient’s unique genetic make-up. 
 
Description of the Research  
We are requesting your permission to use your cancer tissue, some of your normal tissue, 
and information from your medical records in this study.  The following sections describe 
how your tissue samples and information will be collected and studied if you give us 
permission to include you in this study.   
 
Collection of Your Samples and Medical Information 
 Your scheduled surgery is part of the medical treatment that you agreed upon with 
your doctor.  Your surgery is not part of the TCGA research project.  During 
 1 
surgery, cancer tissue will be removed, and usually, when cancer tissue is 
removed, very small amounts of nearby normal tissue also are removed.  After the 
pathology department takes the tissue they need for your diagnosis, we will 
receive some of the extra cancer and normal tissues that would normally be 
thrown away. 
 We also will collect a second type of normal tissue (blood) from you by drawing 
about 4 tablespoons of blood from a vein in your arm. 
 If you object to having blood drawn, we will collect some normal tissue from you 
by swabbing cells from the inside of your cheeks or saliva from which genetic 
material can be collected.  
 We also will collect information from your medical records, including your age, 
ethnic background, diagnosis, disease history, medical treatments, and response to 
treatments. 
       
Coding of Your Tissue Samples and Medical Information 
 Your tissues, blood sample, and medical information will be labeled with a code 
number. 
 Only Dr. ____________ at (Institution) will have the information that matches the 
code to traditionally-used identifying information, such as your name, address, 
phone number, or social security number.  Dr. ___ will keep the information that 
matches the code to this traditionally-used identifying information in a 
safeguarded database.  Only very few, authorized people, who have specifically 
agreed to protect your identity, will have access to this database.  All other 
researchers and personnel, including those who will be working with your 
samples and medical information, will not have access to any of the traditionally-
used identifying information about you.  
 
Analysis of Your Samples and Medical Information 
 Your coded tissue samples will be sent to an NCI-sponsored storage facility, 
currently known as the Biospecimen Core Resource (BCR).  The samples will be 
processed there and portions of your samples then will be sent to different types 
of laboratories as part of this project.  One type of laboratory will analyze your 
DNA by a method called sequencing.  Other types of laboratories will study other 
biochemical material from your samples by different methods.  The remaining 
portions of your samples, if any, will be stored in the BCR for an unlimited period 
of time for future use in research related to cancer or, perhaps, in other research 
projects. 
 Information from analyses of your samples and your medical information will be 
put into databases along with information from the other people who volunteered 
for this project.  These databases will be accessible by the Internet in two ways: 
o Some of the results from the analysis will be mixed with results from other 
participants and put in a completely public database, available to anyone 
on the Internet.  This information will not be specific to you or any other 
participant. 
o The other database is private, and will include person-by-person coded 
genetic, biochemical and medical information.  The results in this database 
 2 
will be available to the global biomedical research community, but the 
access is controlled.   Only researchers who have received approval from 
an NIH Data Access Committee will be authorized to access this database.  
 
Please note that traditionally-used identifying information about you, such as your 
name, address, telephone number, or social security number, will NOT be put into 
either the public or controlled-access databases for this project. 
 
Recontact 
 
In the future, we may want to obtain additional samples or more information about your 
health or medical care.  Right now, we are just asking your permission to recontact you if 
this should be needed.  If you say yes, a person from (Institution) would contact you in 
the future to ask whether you would be interested in participating in this additional 
research. 
 
Payment and Costs  
 
You will not be paid to participate in this project.  Your tissue samples and your medical 
information will be used only for research purposes and will not be sold.  It is possible 
that some of the research conducted using your samples or information eventually will 
lead to the development of new diagnostic tests, new drugs or other commercial products.  
Should this occur, you will not receive any part of the profits generated from such 
products. 
 
You will not incur any costs from participating in this project.  The chance that you will 
be physically injured as a result of participating in this project is very small.  However, if 
you are physically injured as a result of participating in this project, emergency medical 
treatment for your research-related injury will be provided to you at no cost.  
 
Potential Benefits of Participating in the Project 
 
You should not expect to personally benefit from this research.  The main reason you 
may want to participate is to help researchers and health professionals around the world 
to better understand the causes of cancer and other diseases so that they can find better 
ways to prevent, detect, treat, and cure such illnesses. 
 
Potential Risks of Participating in the Project 
 
Physical Risks 
 
There are very few physical risks associated with this project.  Possible side effects 
from drawing the blood sample include mild pain, bleeding, bruising, and infection at 
the site of the needle insertion.  Fainting or light-headedness can sometimes occur, 
but usually lasts only a few minutes. 
  
 3 
Psychological or Social Risks Associated with Loss of Privacy 
 Your privacy is very important to us and we will use many safety measures to 
protect your privacy.  However, in spite of all of the safety measures that we will 
use, we cannot guarantee that your identity will never become known.  Although 
your genetic information is unique to you, you do share some genetic information 
with your children, parents, brothers, sisters, and other relatives.  Consequently, it 
may be possible that genetic information from them could be used to help identify 
you.  Similarly, it may be possible that genetic information from you could be 
used to help identify them.   
 While neither the public nor the controlled-access databases developed for this 
project will contain information that is traditionally used to identify you, such as 
your name, address, telephone number, or social security number, people may 
develop ways in the future that would allow someone to link your genetic or 
medical information in our databases back to you.  For example, someone could 
compare information in our databases with information from you (or a relative) in 
another database and be able to identify you (or your relative).  It also is possible 
that there could be violations to the security of the computer systems used to store 
the codes linking your genetic and medical information to you.   
 Since some genetic variations can help to predict the future health problems of 
you and your relatives, this information might be of interest to employers, health 
providers, insurance companies, and others.  Patterns of genetic variation also can 
be used by law enforcement agencies to identify a person or his/her relatives.  
Therefore, your genetic information potentially could be used in ways that could 
cause you or your family distress, such as by revealing that you (or a relative) 
carry a genetic disease or by leading to the denial of employment or insurance for 
you (or a relative).   
 There also may be other privacy risks that we have not foreseen.   
 
While we believe that the risks to you and your family are very low, we are unable to tell 
you exactly what all of the risks are.  In 2008, the federal government established the 
Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act (GINA), a law that prohibits genetic 
discrimination in employment and health insurance. It is important to note that while this 
law protects you from certain kinds of genetic discrimination, there are exceptions.  For 
example, GINA does not apply to employers with fewer than 15 employees. 
Additionally, this law does not protect you from genetic discrimination in life, disability, 
or long-term care insurance.  [Note to PI/IRB: insert state/local laws reference that may 
offer additional protections to safeguard patients’ genetic information and prevent genetic 
discrimination.]  
 
Keeping Your Information Confidential 
 
We will make every attempt to protect the confidentiality of your information.  This 
signed consent form will be stored in a locked file that will be accessible only to a very 
small number of authorized people involved in this project.   
 
 4 
To help us protect the confidentiality of your information, we have obtained a Certificate 
of Confidentiality from the National Institutes of Health.  With this Certificate, we cannot 
be forced to disclose information that may identify you, even by a court order, in any 
federal, state, or local civil, criminal, administrative, legislative, or other proceedings.  
We will use this Certificate to resist any demands for information that would identify 
you, with the following exceptions: 
 
 The Certificate cannot be used to resist a request for your information from the 
United States Government when the information is to be used for auditing or 
evaluation of federally funded projects or for information that must be disclosed 
to meet the requirements of the federal Food and Drug Administration (FDA). 
 
 The Certificate does not prevent you or a member of your family from voluntarily 
releasing information about yourself or your involvement in this research.  Also, 
if you have given written consent to an insurer, employer, or other person to 
receive research information, then we may not use the Certificate to withhold that 
information. 
 
Project Results 
 
Your individual results from this research project will not be given back to you or put 
into your medical records.   
 
If research from this project is published in professional journals, it will not include 
traditionally-used identifying information, such as your name, address, telephone 
number, or social security number.  Some publications from this project will be found at 
the www.cancergenome.nih.gov website. 
 
Voluntary Participation  
 
The choice to participate in this research by donating your tissues and medical 
information is completely up to you. No matter what you decide to do, your decision 
will not affect your medical care. 
 
Alternatives to Participating in the Project 
 
The alternative option is not to participate.   
  
 5 
Withdrawal from the Project 
 
You may stop being part of this research project at any time and for any reason.  If you 
wish to withdraw, please contact the person named below.  If you withdraw, we will stop 
collecting any of your information and will no longer distribute your samples to anyone – 
they will be discarded.  However, please understand that, even if you do withdraw, once 
your samples have been distributed to the participating research centers and your 
information transferred to the databases, it will not be possible to discard your samples or 
remove your information from this research project. 
 
If you withdraw from this project, it will in no way affect the care you receive from this 
hospital. 
 
Contact Information 
 
If you have any questions about the project or your participation, [please use specific 
institutional language here, but do not automatically promise ability to withdraw]. 
 
 
 
Agreeing to Participate in the Project  
 
To participate in this research, you must agree to ALL of the following statements: 
 
 I voluntarily agree to donate cancer tissue and normal tissue to be used for this 
and for other research projects.  
 I agree to release information from my medical records for this and for other 
research projects. 
 I agree to have my coded genetic information and coded medical information 
placed in databases accessible by the Internet, as described in the Analysis of Your 
Samples and Medical Information section on page 2 of this document. 
 I understand that my coded genetic information and coded medical information in 
the Internet databases will be used in this and in other research projects.  
 I understand that there is a risk that someone in the future might be able to use 
information in these databases to identify me or possibly my relative(s).  
 I agree to be recontacted in the future to see if I am willing to provide additional 
samples or follow-up information about my health or medical care.  
   
Please sign your name here if you agree with the above six statements. 
 
 
Your signature: ________________________________________________________ 
 
Date: ________________________________ 
 
Signature of Doctor/Nurse/Other Witness____________________________________ 
 6 
