Consent to Participate in Research (Short Form)

Study Title:  (Title as listed on IRB application)

Person Responsible for Research:  (PI, may also include Co-I, and/or study staff)

Study Description:  The purpose of this research study is to (add study specific information).  If you agree to participate, you will be asked to (list study specific activities).  This will take approximately (length of time) of your time.

Risks / Benefits:  Risks that you may experience from participating are (list specific risks; if none state “there are no major risks to participating in this study”).  There will be (list costs to participant; If no costs say “There are no costs for participating.”) costs for participating.  Benefits of participating include … (describe direct benefits to subject, if none state “There are no direct benefits to participating in this study.”).  

Confidentiality:  Your information collected for this study is completely confidential and no individual participant will ever be identified with his/her research information.  Data from this study will be saved on password protected computer for (length of time data will be retained).  Only (PI, study staff, etc. – list who will have access to the data) will have access to the information.  However, [Insert the sponsor’s/funder’s name here if applicable, otherwise delete], the Case Western Reserve University Institutional Review Board or appropriate federal agencies like the Office for Human Research Protections may review this study’s records. 

Voluntary Participation:  Your participation in this study is voluntary. You may choose not to take part in this study, or if you decide to take part, you can change your mind later and withdraw from the study. You are free to not answer any questions or withdraw at any time. Your decision will not change any present or future relationships with the University of Wisconsin Milwaukee. The alternatives to participating in this study include (list alternatives - if none state “There are no known alternatives available to participating in this research study other than not taking part.”  If the sentence is not appropriate for the study, it may be deleted.)

Who do I contact for questions about the study:  For more information about the study or study procedures, contact (name) at (email and/or phone number).

Who do I contact for questions about my rights or complaints towards my treatment as a research subject?  Contact the CWRU SBER IRB at 216-368-6993 or cwru-irb@case.edu. 

Research Subject’s Consent to Participate in Research: 
To voluntarily agree to take part in this study, you must be 18 years of age or older.  By signing the consent form, you are giving your consent to voluntarily participate in this research project.

	
Printed Name of Subject/Legally Authorized Representative	

			
Signature of Subject/Legally Authorized Representative	Date


Informed Consent
Case Western Reserve University 

IRB Protocol Number:    IRB Approval date:

