Consent to be part of a Research Repository
The University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio (UTHSCSA)
To be conducted at
Select appropriate Study sites
University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio,
University Health System (UHS),
Texas Biomedical Research Institute,
Southwest Research Institute,
Christus Santa Rosa Health Care

Information about this formEnrolling Children or Incompetent Adults
Insert this paragraph only for studies enrolling children or incompetent adults
If you are providing consent for someone else, for example your child, your next-of-kin or someone for whom you are the legal guardian or are designated as a surrogate decision maker on a medical power of attorney, please note that in the sections that follow the word "you" refers to the person you are providing consent for. 

AND, for all studies include:
You may be eligible to take part in a research study.  This form gives you important information about the study.  

Please take time to review this information carefully.  You should talk to the researchers about the study and ask them any questions you have.  You may also wish to talk to others (for example, your friends, family, or a doctor) about your participation in this study.  If you decide to take part in the study, you will be asked to sign this form.  Before you sign this form, be sure you understand what the study is about, including the risks and possible benefits to you.

Voluntary Participation - You do not have to participate if you don't want to.  You may also leave the study at any time.  If you leave the study before it is finished, there will be no penalty to you, and you will not lose any benefits to which you are entitled.  

General Information - "Who is conducting this research?"
Principal Investigator
The Principal Investigator (PI) is [choose either: the researcher directing this research repository (for local repository) or the researcher directing the local collection of materials (for external repository).   The PI is responsible for protecting your rights, safety and welfare as a participant in the research.  The PI for this study is  [Insert the name and degrees of the PI and the PI's respective affiliations (i.e., department and institution)]

Co-Principal Investigator while a Co-PI is not encouraged, insert the following if the study has a Co-Principal Investigator, insert 
The Co-Principal Investigator shares the principal investigator's responsibilities for this study.  The Co-Principal Investigator for this study is Insert the [name] and [degrees] of the Co-PI and the Co-PI's respective affiliations [department and institution]

Conflict of Interest  If any member of the research team has a potential financial conflict of interest related to the study, insert the following or similar statement (Language should be modified to fit the specific facts and circumstances.) Delete this section if no one has a potential financial conflict of interest
A member of the research team, [insert name] is
Select and edit the text below as needed - the specific wording should be modified to fit the circumstances:
 - a paid consultant to the company which is paying for (part of) this study. 
 - a paid consultant or paid member of the Advisory Board, and receives payment for lectures from the company which is paying for (part of) this study.
- an unpaid consultant to the company which is paying for (part of) this study.
- a founder of the company, has stock in the company, and is a paid consultant to the company sponsoring this study.
- an inventor of [insert the drug, compound, device, etc.,], for which a patent may be filed by the institution. If the patent is pursued, based on data from this and other research, royalties and other compensation may be received by the institution and the investigator. Thus, UTHSCSA and the investigator have a financial interest in the outcome of this study.

AND if appropriate, add:
UTHSCSA owns equity (stock) in the company insert the [name of the outside entity] which is paying for this study.

AND if appropriate, add:
In the future, it is possible that the results of this research could result in a financial benefit to insert the [name of the institution] and/or the principal investigator.  This institution has taken steps to not let this interfere with the way the study is conducted or your safety.

AND
If you require further information regarding the financial arrangements described in this paragraph, you should discuss the matter with the Principal Investigator.  

Funding 
If funded by an external entity, add:
Study Sponsor:   [insert name]
If the study is funded, a "sponsor disclosure" statement must be included.  Select the template wording appropriate to the type of funding (either for profit or non-profit / federal).  If necessary, revise the applicable disclosure statement so that it is specific for your study.  

For-Profit Sponsor
[insert name of study sponsor ]  , a for-profit company, is funding this study (the sponsor).  The sponsor developed the repository and is providing money to [insert name the institution(s) receiving the support, e.g., UTHSCSA] so that the researchers can conduct the study.
       Note: If this repository was not developed by the sponsor (e.g., the principal investigator developed it), revise the sentence above. 

Non-Profit Sponsor or Federal Agency
[insert name of non-profit organization or funding agency], a [pick one: non-profit organization or federal agency] that promotes scientific research, is funding this study (the sponsor).  This organization is providing money to [insert name the institution(s) receiving the support, e.g., UTHSCSA] so that the researchers can collect and store materials for research use in the future.

Purpose of this study - "Why is this study being done?"Briefly (one paragraph) explain in lay-terms the reason for the repository.  Do not describe the details of the procedures here - that will be included in the Procedures section. 
Revise this section to match the specifics of your repository.  Provide explanation of medical or technical terms so that the information is understandable to the lay person.

You are being asked to participate in this research repository.  A research repository is a special type of research also known as a tissue bank or data registry.  A repository provides a way for researchers to store samples of tissues (for example, blood, tissue specimens obtained from biopsies, and tissues or organs removed during surgery) and medical information (for example, information from your medical record about your condition) about a person for future use in research studies.  In this consent form, tissues of all types will be referred to as "tissue" and private medical information will be referred to as "data".  Together, tissues and data stored in a repository are referred to as "materials".

Materials from a repository can be used in research to help find out more about the causes of disease, how to prevent it, and how to treat it.  Storing tissue and information about the person who provided the tissue in a repository is one way that researchers plan for new research.  

This research repository was designed because we want to learn about [insert focus of the repository].   However, the specifics of future research studies using this repository are unknown at this time.  

Your materials may be helpful for research whether or not you have the disease or condition that is the focus of this repository.

Future research studies using materials from this repository may include genetic testing.  In some cases, genetic testing of tissues can be used to indicate a risk for the development of certain diseases or to discover possible changes in a person's future health status or life expectancy, or that of his/her children and family members. 

There may be potential commercial benefits from the repository's use of your materials.  There are no plans to provide you with money or other compensation.


Select either local or external repository:

Local repository
The repository is maintained at [insert name and location of repository].  The Principal Investigator is responsible for the repository.  
[Insert Mailing Address for local repository]

OR External repository
The repository is maintained at [insert name and location of repository].  
[insert name of organization or institution hosting repository] is responsible for the repository.  
[Insert Mailing Address for external repository]

You may discontinue all further participation in this research repository at any time and request that your currently stored materials no longer be used.  Contact the repository at the address provided above to notify them of your decision.  After you discontinue participation, the repository will not collect any new materials from you and will not use your banked specimens or identifiable information for any new research purposes.

Information about Study Participants - "Who is participating in this research?"
Who can take part in this research?   You are being asked to be a participant in this research repository because state general reason why the person was identified to participate].  For example, because they have the disease being studied and if applicable why it is reasonable for this particular subject to participate; they have not responded the standard care; they are already scheduled for the procedure being studied, etc. This is not intended to be a repetition of the inclusion criteria.
Information about Study Procedures - "What will be done if you decide to be in the research?"
If you decide to take part, you will be asked to sign this consent form.

The following information about you will be collected and stored in the repository:  [list type of data/information being banked]

If banking existing tissue/specimens/data from research or clinical sources include:
As part of your [edit as applicable] routine care or participation in the research study titled [insert research study title] you had [insert procedure] which involved the collection of [list type of data: e.g., surveys, medical record information, laboratory results, etc. and/or tissue: e.g., blood, spinal fluid, etc]. The researchers are asking permission to obtain [edit as applicable] copies of [medical records, research records, etc] and remaining tissue for the repository. [note - generally the risks related to leftover tissues are limited to issues of confidentiality. If there are additional risks, address these in the risks section]  

If banking left over tissue/specimens (no additional tissue is obtained or procedure performed) include:
As part of your routine care, you are scheduled to have a [insert procedure] which will involve the removal of [list type of tissue, e.g., blood, spinal fluid, etc] from your body.  Frequently, extra tissue is "left over" after required tests have been done.  Often the left over tissue is discarded.  The researchers are asking permission to obtain the remaining tissue for the repository.  [note - generally the risks related to discarded tissues are limited to issues of confidentiality. If there are additional risks, address these in the risks section]  

If banking additional tissue/specimens obtained during a routine procedure include:
As part of your routine care, you are scheduled to have a [insert procedure] which will involve the removal of [list type of tissue, e.g., blood, spinal fluid, etc] from you body.  The researchers are asking permission to obtain additional tissue at the same time that the routine tissues are being obtained.  The additional tissue will be for the repository.  Address the risks reasonably expected from obtaining the additional tissue in the risks section.  

If banking tissue and/or information obtained by performing additional procedures (not indicated as part of routine care or as part of another IRB approved research study) include: 
The researchers are asking permission to perform additional procedures to obtain tissue or information for the repository.  The following is a description of the procedures that will be done so that the tissues or information may be included in the repository:Insert description of each procedure, e.g., biopsy, venipuncture, or survey

Important guidance for describing repository procedures
* Use bullets and/or paragraphs. 
* Describe in lay language all procedures and their purposes.  
o Describe what the subject will feel or experience
* Quantify procedures - for example 
o Number of each procedure per visit and total for research
o Volume of blood samples only if:
* (a) exceeds 550 ml in an 8 week period from healthy, non-pregnant adults, or
* (b) from other adults and children, the amount drawn exceeds the lesser of 50 ml or 3 ml per kg in an 8 week period
* Address the risks reasonably expected from each repository driven procedure in the risks section.  If you feel you must include risks with the research procedure, you are still required to provide ALL risk information in the risk section.

If you would like to offer options add: 
Options to the procedures listed above

You can choose to participate in one, some, or all the repository procedures listed in this consent.  Please initial next to the procedures you agree to take part.
_____ [insert first optional procedure]

_____ [insert second optional procedure]

AND add:
The materials being put into the repository will be kept for [insert length of time the information and specimens will be stored - e.g., until none of the specimen is left, for X years, or indefinitely].
You will not be provided with the results of the studies using your tissue from this bank.  Any results from research conducted in the future on your stored specimens would be of unclear value and unknown clinical meaning.

Risks - "What are the risks of participation in the research?"
In assessing risk, be sure to consider all possible sources of harm, including physical, social, psychological, legal and economic.  The risks that are reasonably expected from the collection and storage of specimens and information should be described. 

Informational risks related to the repository
Select either anonymous or identifiable material statement depending on the nature your bank.

If only banking anonymous materials use this statement:
Your samples and medical information will not be stored with identifying information (such as your name) or a code that is linked to your identifying information.  The materials in the repository cannot be traced back to you as the participant.  There is no risk to you that your private information could be unintentionally released.  Once your samples or information are entered into the repository, you will not be able to withdraw them because the samples will not be traceable

OR, if banking identifiable or coded materials, use this statement: 
Your samples and medical information will be stored with identifying information (such as your name).  If this information were unintentionally (by mistake) released it could harm you.  The repository is required to protect your private information to prevent unintentional release of your private information.  Your name, address, phone number and other identifying information will be taken off anything associated with your tissues or medical information and replaced with a code.  The key, linking your identity to the code will be kept in a separate, secure location, only accessible by the repository staff.  


Genetic Informational risks related to the repository
Select either anonymous or identifiable material statement depending on the nature your bank.

If only banking anonymous materials use this statement:
Future research studies using materials from this repository may include genetic testing.  Human tissue contains genes that determine many of a person's physical characteristics, such as the color of eyes and hair.  In some cases, genetic testing of tissues can be used to indicate a risk for the development of certain diseases.  Genetic information is unique to each individual and could potentially be used to discover possible changes in a person's future health status or life expectancy, or that of his/her children and family members. Even though the results of genetic testing cannot be linked to you, it is possible that people of your ethnic background may be found to be at more risk for certain diseases based on future genetic research and this information might harm you in the future as a member of the group.  

OR, if banking identifiable or coded materials, use this statement: 
Future research studies using materials from this repository may include genetic testing.  Human tissue contains genes that determine many of a person's physical characteristics, such as the color of eyes and hair.  In some cases, genetic testing of tissues can be used to indicate a risk for the development of certain diseases.  Genetic information is unique to each individual and could potentially be used to discover possible changes in a person's future health status or life expectancy, or that of his/her children and family members. Even if your tissues are used for this type of research, the results will not be put in your health records.
Releasing this information to you could cause psychological distress, anxiety or family problems.  

Releasing this information to others, such as including it in your medical record, may pose a possible risk of discrimination, or increase difficulty in obtaining or maintaining disability, long-term care, or life insurance.  

These risks would occur if your information is released by mistake.  The measures being taken to protect your privacy are discussed below and make this possibility unlikely.

Even though the results of genetic testing may not be linked to you, it is possible that people of your ethnic background may be found to be at more risk for certain diseases based on future genetic research and this information might harm you in the future as a member of the group. 
Also, there may be unknown risks of genetic testing in the future.


If performing collecting procedures include the following section
Risks from the specific collection procedures
Revise this section as needed to reflect the expected risks for procedures used to collect information or specimens from subjects.

Risks and side effects related to the [insert name of the procedure] include those which are:
 Delete any category that is not applicable.  Click here for acceptable Example of Risks Table.

Likely (insert range approximately "X" - "Y"# of subjects out of 100),

	Likely and serious

	Likely and not serious


Less Likely (insert range approximately "X" - "Y"# of subjects out of 100),

	Less Likely and serious

	Less Likely and not serious

Rare but Serious (insert range approximately "X" - "Y"# of subjects out of 100),

Side effects that occur in less than 2-3% of patients do not have to be listed unless they are serious, and should then appear in the "rare but serious" category.

For more information about risks and side effects, ask one of the researchers or study staff.

AND if appropriate include
We will tell you about any significant new findings which develop during the course of this research which may relate to your willingness to continue taking part.  

What if a research-related injury occurs? 
The researchers have taken steps to minimize the known or expected risks.  However, you may still experience problems or side effects, even though the researchers are careful to avoid them.  If you believe that you have been harmed, notify the researchers as soon as possible. You may also need to tell your regular doctors.

In the event of a research-related injury or if you experience an adverse reaction, please immediately contact your study doctor.  See the section "Contact Information" for phone numbers and additional information.  

If there are no specific provisions for covering the costs of treating research related injuries, use:
If you are injured as a result of the research procedures, your injury will be treated.   This care may be billed to you or your insurance. Depending on the circumstances, this care may be provided at no cost to you.   We have no plans to give you money if you are injured. The investigator can provide you with more information.

OR if the study sponsor has provisions for covering the costs of treating research related injuries, describe those here.

AND include
If you sign this form, you do not give up your right to seek additional compensation if you are harmed as a result of being in this study.


Benefits - "How could you or others benefit from your taking part in this study?"Choose either
The possible benefit of your participating in this study is consider adding the benefits related to the intervention or procedure and/or benefits related to a research monitoring procedure which is likely to contribute to the well-being of the subject.  There is no guarantee or promise that you will receive any benefit from this study.  
OR
You may not receive any personal benefits from being in this study.

AND include
We hope the information learned from this study will benefit other people with similar conditions in the future.

 Insert Payments section (below) only if payments to the subject are planned.
Payments - Will there be any payments for participation?
Describe the amount or nature (provide details such as cash/check/gift card), when it will be paid/provided (provide details on frequency of compensation and timing), and when the compensation will be prorated if the subject does not complete the study, provide a schedule. 

Insert the following only if the payments will exceed $600 per subject
If you are paid, the money you receive may be taxable.  When the total payment is $600 or more in one calendar year, the institution must report the amount to the IRS.  The IRS considers it earned income and treats it like any other income. 

AND if payment is being paid by a check issued by UTHSCSA, add:
Please note that if you are on record as owing money to the State of Texas, such as for back child support or a delinquent student loan, the payment may be applied to that debt and you may not receive a check. 

Insert Costs section (below) only if there are additional costs to the subject that may result from participation in the research.
Costs - Will taking part in this study cost anything?
Describe the possibility of costs to the subject because of participation.  

Confidentiality - How will your records be kept confidential?
Information we learn about you in this study will be handled in a confidential manner, within the limits of the law.  If we publish the results of the study in a scientific journal or book, we will not identify you.  The Institutional Review Board and other groups that have the responsibility of monitoring research may want to see study records which identify you as a subject in this study.   


Research policies require that private information about you be protected.  This is especially true for your health information.  

However, the law sometimes allows or requires others to see your information.  The information given below describes how your privacy and the confidentiality of your research records will be protected in this study.

What is Protected Health Information (PHI)?  
Protected Health Information is information about a person's health that includes information that would make it possible to figure out whose it is.  According to the law, you have the right to decide who can see your protected health information.  If you choose to take part in this study, you will be giving your permission to the investigators and the research study staff (individuals carrying out the study) to see and use your health information for this research study.  In carrying out this research, the health information we will see and use about you will include: Summarize the types of information that will be obtained in the study.
Examples - your  medical history and blood work, information that we get from your medical record, information you give us during your participation in the study such as during interviews or from questionnaires, results of blood tests; demographic information like your age, marital status, the type of work you do and the years of education you have completed.

We will get this information by [specify how the PHI will be gathered for your particular study.  For example:  by asking you, asking your doctor, by looking at your chart at the (name of health care facility)]. 

How will your PHI be shared?  
Because this is a research study, we will be unable keep your PHI completely confidential.  We may share your health information with people and groups involved in overseeing this research study including:
If applicable, add/edit the following:
* the sponsor of the study
* the company [name the company] that makes the study drug/device.
* the following collaborators at other institutions that are involved with the study:  [insert name and institution - these are collaborators at institutions not affiliated with UTHSCSA IRB] 
* the committee that checks the study data on an ongoing basis, to determine if the study should be stopped for any reason.
* the members of the local research team
* The Institutional Review Board and the Compliance Office of the University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, and other groups that oversee how research studies are carried out. 
* The Research offices at [select all appropriate, delete others:] the University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, South Texas Veterans Health Care System (STVHCS), University Health System (UHS), Southwest Foundation for Biomedical Research, Southwest Research Institute, Christus Santa Rosa Health Care.  
* [if the study involves a drug or device regulated by the FDA regardless of whether test article is already approved, add:] the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) 

Parts of your PHI may be photocopied and sent to a central location or it may be transmitted electronically, such as by e-mail or fax.

The groups receiving your health information may not be obligated to keep it private.  They may pass information on to other groups or individuals not named here.  [This is a required element.  If you believe it does not apply to your study, submit a request for an alteration of authorization using Form J.]

If you decide to participate in this study, you will be giving your permission for the groups named above, to collect, use and share your health information.  If you choose not to let these groups collect, use and share your health information as explained above, you will not be able to participate in the research study.

How will your PHI be protected?  
[Explain the ways privacy will be protected such as:]   In an effort to protect your privacy, the study staff will use code numbers instead of your name, to identify your health information.  Initials and numbers will be used on any photocopies of your study records, [if applicable add: and on any blood or tissue samples that are sent outside of the (name the study site or sites) for review or testing].  If the results of this study are reported in medical journals or at meetings, you will not be identified.

Do you have to allow the use of your health information?
You do not have to allow (authorize) the researchers and other groups to see and share your health information.  If you choose not to let the researchers and other groups use your health information, there will be no penalties but you will not be allowed to participate in the study.  
After you enroll in this study, you may ask the researchers to stop using your health information at any time .  However, you need to say this in writing and send your letter to [give the name and full mailing address of the person to whom a request to revoke must be sent].  If you tell the researchers to stop using your health information, your participation in the study will end and the study staff will stop collecting new health information from you and about you for this study.  However, the study staff will continue to use the health information collected up to the time they receive your letter asking them to stop.

Can you ask to see the PHI that is collected about you for this study?  
The federal rules say that you can see the health information that we collect about you and use in this study.  Contact the study staff if you have a need to review your PHI collected for this study.
 Explain any limitations that might affect the subjects' access to their PHI, for example:
You will only have access to your PHI until [insert date or event].
OR, if the nature of the study makes it necessary or preferable to temporarily suspend access, explain this by adding:
Because of the type of research, you can only access your PHI when the study is done.  At that time, you have the right to see and copy the medical information we collect about you during the study, for as long as that information is kept by the study staff and other groups involved.  

How long will your PHI be used?  
By signing this form, you agree to let us use and disclose your health information for purposes of the study until the end of the study.  There is no expiration date because repositories by their nature are intended to use stored materials continually.  We do not know how long it will take us to finish doing all of the analyses and we will need to use your health information for as long as it takes.


Contact Information - Who can you contact if you have questions, concerns, comments or complaints?
If you have questions now, feel free to ask us.  If you have additional questions later or you wish to report a problem or complaint which may be related to this study please contact:

Contact table is optional - revise as needed
Name/SalutationPhone numberPager
The University of Texas Health Science Center committee that reviews research on human subjects (Institutional Review Board) will answer any questions about your rights as a research subject, and take any concerns, comments or complaints you may wish to offer.  You can contact the IRB by calling 210-567-8250, or by mail to IRB, UTHSCSA, Mail Code 7830, 7703 Floyd Curl Drive, San Antonio, TX  78229-3900.



Research Repository Consent and Authorization Signature SectionIf you agree to participate in this research and agree to the use of your protected health information in this research sign this section.  You will be given a signed copy of this form to keep.  You do not waive any of your legal rights by signing this form.  

SIGN THIS FORM ONLY IF THE STATEMENTS LISTED BELOW ARE TRUE
* You have read the above information.
* Your questions have been answered to your satisfaction about the research and about the collection, use and sharing of your protected health information.
If consent provided by adults (without a surrogate), include this signature section:
Adult Signature Section
* You have voluntarily decided to take part in this research study.
* You authorize the collection, use and sharing of your protected health information as described in this form

AM
PMPrinted Name of Subject

Signature of Subject
DateTime

AM
PMPrinted Name of Witness
Signature of Witness
DateTime
  Check if consent and authorization obtained from an individual who is unable to read and/or write but can otherwise communicate and/or comprehend English. Have witness initial below.
Declaration of witness:  I was present for the entire consent process.  ________ ←(initials of witness)
AM
PMPrinted Name of Person Obtaining ConsentSignature of Person Obtaining ConsentDateTimeConsent and authorization was obtained from this individual who is unable to read and/or write but can otherwise communicate and/or comprehend English.  The method used for communication with the subject was: ______________________.  
The specific means by which the subject communicated agreement to participate was: __________________________________  

If consent provided by a surrogate, include this signature section:
Surrogate Signature Section  for studies enrolling adults unable to provide consent, or children
* You are voluntarily giving your consent for another person to participate in this study because you believe this person would want to take part if able to make the decision and you believe it is in this person's best interest.  
* You also authorize the collection, use and sharing of another person's protected health information as described in this form

AM
PM
Printed Name of Subject

Signature of Subject, indicating Assent (If incapable of signing, person obtaining consent should initial here)
DateTime



AM
PMPrinted Name of Person Giving Consent & Authorization for Subject   
Signature of Person Giving Consent & Authorization
Parent/Guardian/Legally Authorized Representative

DateTime



AM
PMPrinted Name of Witness Witness Signature

DateTime


AM
PMPrinted Name of Person Obtaining Consent & AuthorizationSignature of Person Obtaining Consent & AuthorizationDateTime

Title of Study: must match the title listed on the protocol EXACTLY

Page 1 of 3
Repository Consent & Authorization Document (Form E)        V Nov 2016

