Dartmouth College • Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center
COMMITTEE FOR THE PROTECTION OF HUMAN SUBJECTS
CPHS.Tasks@Dartmouth.edu • 603-646-6482

CPHS – RESEARCH INVOLVING INDIVIDUALS WITH IMPAIRED DECISION-MAKING CAPACITY 
Please complete: CPHS#                  PI: 
If you are completing this form on a Mac, indicate your answer to any checkboxes by bolding or highlighting, or by deleting any incorrect options.    


Introductory Information: 
When a subject lacks capacity to give informed consent, the investigator should obtain written permission from a legally authorized representative prior to enrolling the subject in a research study.  Federal Regulations define legally authorized representative as an "individual or judicial or other body authorized under applicable law to consent on behalf of a prospective subject to the subject's participation in the procedure(s) involved in the research" (45CFR46.102(c)).  Neither Federal Regulations nor New Hampshire State Law provide specific information about who may or may not qualify as a legally authorized representative in a research setting.  For the purposes of this policy statement, the options of defining a legally authorized representative include: 

a) Durable power of attorney for health care (DPAHC), 
b) Court appointed legal guardian
c) Next-of-kin. 

A strict interpretation of NH state law does not provide for the use of next-of-kin as a surrogate decision maker for investigational activity. The argument for allowing next-of-kin to consent to participation in research activity for an individual who lacks capacity to consent is that, without such an option, it is often impractical or impossible to conduct important medical research on conditions where results with the best current therapy are suboptimal. When investigational therapy represents the best treatment option or when risks to the subject are small in relation to the potential benefit of research to society, a policy which creates a major obstacle to the conduct of important research activity is ethically unsound. 

With the above issues in mind, the Dartmouth CPHS has established the following policy for research studies that may involve adult subjects who lack capacity to give informed consent to participation in a research study. Please carefully review all items.

Submission requirements:
When initially submitting a protocol for review by the CPHS, the investigator will inform the CPHS in the appropriate section of the CPHS Study Plan (item #18) if the study may involve subjects who lack capacity to give informed consent to participate in the study being proposed.

In addition, when a study may involve subjects who lack capacity to give informed consent, the investigator will use the form provided below to inform the CPHS of the requested options to provide permission for an individual who lacks capacity to participate in the research study and respond to specific CPHS questions.

For all requests:
Even with the permission of a DPAHC, or court appointed legal guardian, the CPHS will not permit a subject who lacks capacity to give informed consent to participate in a research study that offers little chance of DIRECT BENEFIT to the research subject over what they could receive outside the research setting and involves a meaningful increase in the risk of harm or discomfort, regardless of the potential gain to future subjects or society in general. 
Please complete a) and b):
a) Does participating in this study offer the subject a chance of direct benefit over what they could receive outside the research setting?
 


b) Is there an increase in the risk of harm or discomfort for the subject over what they would experience outside the research setting?



When there is a meaningful chance of DIRECT BENEFIT to the research subject over what they could receive outside the research setting, the CPHS will make a judgment decision about who may consent to participation in the study.  The options include: DPAHC, court appointed legal guardian, and a properly motivated next-of-kin. 

Please indicate the option(s) requested to allow for consent if a subject is incompetent to provide consent:   
Durable power of attorney for health care (DPAHC) 	☐  No		☐  Yes
Court appointed legal guardian				☐  No		☐  Yes
Next-of-kin. 							☐  No		☐  Yes

If a study requests the use of Next-of-Kin as the legally authorized representative,  Please complete a)  through e)  below:   

a) Could the subject receive the same management that they will receive in the research study outside the setting of a research protocol? 



 b) Will participation in the study increase the risk of harm or discomfort compared to what is expected with the management that the subject will receive if they do not participate in the research study? 



c) Will participating in the study increase the chance that the subject will experience a favorable outcome compared to what is expected with the management that the subject will receive if they do not participate in the research study? 



d) What is the magnitude of the benefit that future patients, or society in general, may experience as a result of the subject participating in this study? 



e) The process of appointing a legal guardian may take several months. Would this type of delay compromise patient care? 



The CPHS will use the responses to the items a) – e) when discussing the option of allowing Next-of-Kin to enroll subjects into a research study.  

Signature section of the consent form: 
Below is the signature line to use when individuals lacking decision-making capacity may be enrolled into a research study.  As described above, use of the next-of-kin option requires special CPHS approval:


												
Participant Signature and Date						Printed Name

If participant lacks capacity to provide informed consent, sign below as appropriate:


												Durable Power of Attorney for Health Care and Date 	Printed Name
	
      or 

 											
	Court Appointed Legal Guardian and Date			Printed Name
	
      or	

											
	Next-of-kin and Date						Printed Name


Decision by the CPHS:  

The CPHS decision will be relayed to the investigator via the CPHS approval letter. 
CPHS Template v. 4/16/14	Page 1 of 1

