OFFICE OF RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT

VETERANS HEALTH ADMINISTRATION

Guidance on What to Include in an Informed Consent Document When Banking or

Storing VA Biospecimens for Research Purposes

Date: October 19, 2016

SCOPE: Informed consent for the collection of biospecimens must be obtained in accordance

with VHA Handbook 1200.5. NOTE: This is a guidance document set forth as a best practice

and not an ORD requirement. This guidance document only refers to biospecimens. For details

related to data repositories refer to VHA Handbook 1200.12.

Elements to include in an informed consent document when banking or storing VA

biospecimens for research

(1) A description of the biospecimens to be banked/stored and the process for banking/storing

them.

(2) A description of the research to be conducted with the biospecimens including what future

research may be performed, if known at the time of collection. It should be stated if DNA and/or

RNA will be collected and stored for future studies, when applicable. Note: If the future

research is not known at the time of the research study under which the biospecimens are

collected or the biorepository’s inception, a generalized or broad description of the future

research is acceptable; however, if genetic testing is anticipated, it should be mentioned.

(3) A description of the conditions under which biospecimens will be released to other

researchers and whether they will be released outside the VA. These conditions might include

the requirement of a Material Transfer Agreement, an IRB approved protocol for use of the

biospecimens, etc.

(4) A description of the risks from biospecimen banking/storage including any risks to privacy

and confidentiality, for example, specimen identifiers on the specimen labels, or any data that

may be linked to the biospecimens.

(5) Information about possible consequences of DNA/RNA analyses (such as disclosure of

paternity, potential identifiability, implications for family members, etc.) if genetic or genomic

ORD Guidance on What to Include in an Informed Consent Document When Banking or Storing VA

Biospecimens for Research Purposes

Page | 1

2016

research is anticipated. Potential risks may include breach of confidentiality, which may lead to

discrimination in the areas of employment, insurability, social stigmatization, or psychological

stress caused by disclosure of adverse information to the subject or the subject’s family.

(6) When and under what conditions research results will be conveyed to the participant, the

participant’s family, or the participant’s physician . NOTE: Individual research results are not

normally returned to participants unless directly related to their care, they have been clinically

validated, or run in a laboratory that is certified under the Clinical Laboratory Improvement

Amendments or CLIA. This does not apply to the mandated reporting of results on Clinical

Trials.gov.

(7) Whether biospecimens may be provided to a for-profit company for the development of

products and, if so, whether commercial benefits may be expected for the company and a

statement that the participant should not expect to receive any of those benefits.

(8) What will happen to the biospecimens if the individual withdraws from participation in the

biorepository, or research study, before its completion. The informed consent form should

clearly state how participants may withdraw their consent and what will happen to their

biospecimens if they do withdraw consent. Conditions under which it is not possible to withdraw

biospecimens should be clearly explained. For example: Biospecimens may not be able to be

withdrawn if they have already been sent out for testing or to outside investigators.

(9) When biospecimens are collected for future use, or the creation of a biorepository, as an

optional component of participation in a research study, the informed consent for banking

biospecimens should be a separate section of the main research study informed consent form.

Alternatively, there could be a separate informed consent form for the optional biobanking

component.

(10) If the biorepository or biospecimen collection will be stored outside of the United States at

the time of study initiation, the country of storage should be stated in the informed consent.





ORD Guidance on What to Include in an Informed Consent Document When Banking or Storing VA

Biospecimens for Research Purposes

Page | 2

2016





Document Outline


Guidance on What to Include in an Informed Consent Document When Banking or Storing VA Biospecimens for Research Purposes





