Page 1 of 8 Version 05/08/2015 
 
Medical University of South Carolina 
CONSENT TO BE A RESEARCH SUBJECT 
Patient Participant 
 
The Multidisciplinary Clinical Research Center for 
Rheumatic Diseases in African Americans 
 
In statements below, the word "you" refers to you or to your child or 
adolescent who is being asked to participate in this study. 
 
If you are under 18 years of age: 1) Your parent or legal guardian will be 
present when this informed consent form is presented to you; and 2) You 
will be able to participate only if your parent or legal guardian provides 
permission (and, if you are 10 to 17 years old, you also agree).  
 
A.  PURPOSE AND BACKGROUND: 
 
You are being asked to volunteer for a research study at MUSC sponsored by a grant 
from the National Institutes of Health.  The goal of this grant is to learn more about the 
development of lupus (Systemic Lupus Erythematosus; SLE), scleroderma (Systemic 
Sclerosis), and other rheumatic diseases which affect African-Americans more than 
other groups.  You are being asked to participate because you are a patient with 
probable or definite lupus or scleroderma. 
 
Information about your social, family, medical and medications history, physical exam 
findings, and lab test reports will be collected and stored in a computerized database for 
analysis.  In addition to those used for the purposes of diagnosis and treatment, extra 
samples of blood, urine, tissue, and saliva may be collected for research purposes.  
This is a long-term, open-ended project.  We hope that information gathered in the 
database combined with laboratory examination of your samples will provide more 
information about the causes and treatments of lupus and scleroderma. Dr. Gary 
Gilkeson is in charge of the overall study. This study is being done at the Medical 
University of South Carolina and will involve approximately 910 volunteers. 
 
B.  PROCEDURES:  
 
If you agree to participate the following will happen: We will review your medical record 
to confirm you meet the eligibility criteria for the study and confirm you have a prior 
diagnosis of lupus or scleroderma. Your physician will record your medical history and 
physical examination findings in both your medical record and the database.  You will 
be asked to fill out questionnaires about your physical health, and medical history.  This 
information is collected in the normal course of a medical evaluation.  You will also be 
asked to complete questionnaires about your home and work environment, diet, and 
sleep patterns. If you choose, we can send the questionnaires to you by mail for you to 
 
IRB Number: Pro00021985 
Date Approved 11/17/2015 
MCRC consent pts 8May15.doc Expiration Date: 11/16/2016 
Page 2 of 8 Version 05/08/2015 
 
return to us. With your permission, we can also send the questionnaires to you by email 
through a secure electronic survey program.  At each visit, you may be asked for a 
blood sample and to provide the same amount of urine in addition to the amount you 
give for regular monitoring of your disease. About 6 ½ tablespoons or 95cc of blood will 
be drawn from adults, and no more than 3cc per kilogram weight for children.  During a 
clinic visit, children who are not required to provide blood for normal medical care will 
not be asked to give blood for research purposes.  You may also be asked to provide 
cheek cells, which involves rubbing a small swab firmly against the inside of each cheek 
six times, and a small amount of saliva (about ½ teaspoon or 2cc) which is collected by 
spitting into a tube.  At each visit your clinical information will be updated; we may need 
to review your medical record to do this.  By signing this form, you are giving permission 
to have the information collected about you used for research purposes.  Your samples 
may also be used in genome-wide association studies that look at the genetic 
differences that exist in the complete set of human genes, and the association between 
these differences and health conditions.   
 
C.  DURATION: 
 
We may need to review your medical record to update your clinical information each 
time you visit. The duration of participation in this study is 30-60 minutes per clinic visit, 
for as long as you are under the care of MUSC for your disease, or as long as this study 
continues (5 years).  We will collect samples for research purposes no more than every 
3 months, even if you have clinic appointments with your physician more frequently.  
 
D.  RISKS/DISCOMFORTS:  
 
Blood tests: The risks of drawing blood include temporary discomfort from the needle 
stick, bruising and infection. Fainting could occur but is rare. 
 
Genetic research on biological samples: The investigators involved in this study may 
want to isolate genetic material (DNA and/or RNA) and serum from your blood in order 
to identify genes or proteins that may predispose individuals to develop scleroderma, 
lupus or similar diseases or may influence disease outcome or how individuals respond 
to treatment. When this study is complete the researchers may wish to perform 
additional tests on these samples. All samples will be stored in refrigerators and 
freezers in secured buildings at MUSC and all stored samples will be identified by codes 
defined by investigators in the study. 
 
Research to identify genes that cause or contribute to a disease or trait is an  
increasingly important way to try to understand the role of genes in human disease.  
You have been given this consent form because the Medical University of South 
Carolina investigators want to include your tissue, cell or blood sample in a research 
project, or because they want to save such biological samples for future research.  
There are several things you should know before allowing your tissues, cells or blood to 
 
IRB Number: Pro00021985 
Date Approved 11/17/2015 
MCRC consent pts 8May15.doc Expiration Date: 11/16/2016 
Page 3 of 8 Version 05/08/2015 
 
be studied or to be stored. 
 
1. Your tissue, cell or blood sample will be stored under your name or some other type 
of identifier which could be linked to you. Sometimes these samples are shared for 
research purposes with other investigators at other research sites. If this is done, the 
other investigators would not know your name. 
 
2. In addition to your name, other information about you might be connected to your 
blood or tissue sample. For instance, information about race, ethnicity, sex, your 
medical history, and so forth might be available to investigators studying your tissue or 
blood. Such information is important for scientific reasons and sometimes for public 
health. It is possible that genetic information might come to be associated with your 
racial or ethnic group. 
 
3. Genetic information about you will often apply (in one degree or another) to family 
members. It is not generally the University’s policy to provide genetic information about 
you to your family members. However, certain studies, called “pedigree studies”, share 
such information among family members. For this and related research you will be 
asked if you are willing to share your genetic information with your family members. 
 
4. You have the right to refuse to allow your tissue or blood to be studied or saved for 
future research studies. You may withdraw from this study at any time and remove any 
samples that contain identifiers from research use after the date of your withdrawal. 
This means that while the University might retain the identified samples - the law often 
requires this - they would not be used for research. 
 
5. South Carolina law mandates that your genetic information obtained from any tests or 
from this research, be kept confidential. Our state law prohibits any insurer using this 
information in a discriminatory manner against you or any of your family in issuing or 
renewing insurance coverage for you or your family. Our state law further prohibits our 
sharing your genetic information with anyone except in a few narrow circumstances, 
one of these being a research project of this type, approved by the Institutional Review 
Board and then we must take all steps to protect your identity. You will still be 
responsible for paying for health care, however. The Medical University of South 
Carolina will not be responsible for such costs, even if care is needed for a condition 
revealed during research or clinical testing. 
 
6. Genetic research raises difficult questions about informing you and other subjects of 
any results, or of future results. Some people feel anxious about the possibility of having 
a defective gene that would place them or their children at risk. Some people want to 
know what is found out about them; others do not.  The risks of knowing include anxiety 
and other psychological distress. The risks of not knowing what is found include not 
being aware if there is treatment for the problem being studied. But these risks can 
change depending on whether there is a treatment or cure for a particular disease, and 
 
IRB Number: Pro00021985 
Date Approved 11/17/2015 
MCRC consent pts 8May15.doc Expiration Date: 11/16/2016 
Page 4 of 8 Version 05/08/2015 
 
on how clear the results are.  If there is a medical reason to seek specific information 
from you, your doctor will tell you this. A process called “genetic counseling” is often 
appropriate in such cases; you should ask your doctor or nurse about this if you have 
any questions. 
 
In this study, investigators will not tell you what they find out about you, nor will 
they contact you if a test becomes available to diagnose a condition you might 
have or later develop. 
 
7. If you are concerned about a potential genetic disorder, you and your doctor might 
choose to test specifically for it. This would require additional blood or tissue samples 
and would not be part of this research project. You should discuss this option with your 
doctor or genetic counselor. 
 
8. The presence of a genetic marker does not necessarily mean that an individual will 
develop a disease. Informing people of all such markers independently of medical need 
can cause unnecessary anxiety. On the other hand, the absence of a marker does not 
mean that someone will not get the disease. Genetic diseases appear as a result of a 
complex mixture of hereditary, environmental, behavioral and other factors. 
 
Genome-wide samples:  Your DNA may be used in genome-wide association studies 
and in studies involving whole genome / exome sequencing.  These studies may involve 
investigators at other institutions. Genome-wide association studies look at the genetic 
differences that exist in the complete set of human genes and the association between 
these differences and health conditions.  The following are explanations of whole 
genome and whole exome sequencing: 
 
 Whole genome sequencing (also known as full genome sequencing) is a test that 
determines your entire genetic code, called your genome. Every cell in your body 
contains this code spelled out in your DNA, designated by the letters A, T, C, and G. 
All people have very similar genomes – about 99.6 percent identical – consisting of 
approximately six billion letters. However, everyone is unique and between any two 
people there could be approximately 24 million places where the spelling is different. 
By looking at your genome and comparing it to the genomes of other populations 
with and without disease, we may be able to identify places where your genomes 
don’t match-up. These newly-identified places could be associated with a disease 
such as scleroderma or lupus. This information will allow us to focus on areas of 
your genome that are good candidates for more investigation.  
 
 Your DNA may also be used for whole exome sequencing. Your genome consists of 
genes, short segments of DNA that code for proteins, and many long segments of 
DNA that do not contain genes. The places on the genome that contain genes are 
called exons. Scientists use the term “exome” to represent all of the exons, or 
protein-coding regions, of the genome. Whole exome sequencing is similar to whole 
 
IRB Number: Pro00021985 
Date Approved 11/17/2015 
MCRC consent pts 8May15.doc Expiration Date: 11/16/2016 
Page 5 of 8 Version 05/08/2015 
 
genome sequencing in that it looks at the entire genome, but whole exome 
sequencing only records the gene regions of the genome. 
 
As part of this study, we will be collecting information about your health and your 
individual genes.  This information will be sent to the National Institutes of Health (NIH) 
GWAS database called dbGAP (Database of Genotypes and Phenotypes). No personal 
information that could identify you will be sent to the NIH. 
 
These are the best-known risks and challenges of genetic research. There might be 
other risks we do not know about yet.  It is important that you talk to your doctor, nurse 
or genetic counselor if you have questions or concerns about the research study. 
 
Please initial in one space in each box below to indicate your choices.   Your 
choices will not affect your ability to participate in this research project: 
  
 
Non-genetic research: 
 
_____ Yes, you may store my blood, urine, tissue, and saliva for future non-genetic 
research.  My samples will be labeled with a code that can be linked back to 
identifying information.  This may involve investigators at other institutions.  
 
_____ No, you may not store my blood and urine for future non-genetic research. 
 
 
 
Genetic research: 
 
_____ Yes, you may use my DNA for genetic research on lupus, scleroderma, and other 
diseases, including genome-wide association studies. My samples will be labeled 
with a code that can be linked back to identifying information.  This may involve 
investigators at other institutions. 
 
_____ No, you may not use my DNA for genetic research. 
 
 
 
Contact for future research studies: 
 
_____ Yes, the study team may contact me in the future about future studies. 
 
_____ No, I do not want to be contacted about future studies. 
 
 
 
If you are a minor, we will ask you to re-consent to participating in this research when 
 
IRB Number: Pro00021985 
Date Approved 11/17/2015 
MCRC consent pts 8May15.doc Expiration Date: 11/16/2016 
Page 6 of 8 Version 05/08/2015 
 
you are 18 years old.  If you decide you would like to withdraw your samples you should 
contact the Principal Investigator and we will locate and destroy any unanalyzed 
samples you have donated as a part of this study.  His contact information is: 
 
Gary Gilkeson MD 
Medical University of South Carolina 
Division of Rhuematology and Immunology 
96 Jonathan Lucas Street, MSC 637 
Charleston, SC 29425 
Phone number (843) 792-1991 
 
Your samples will be stored in MUSC freezers without any information that identifies 
you.  They will be kept indefinitely.  They will be available only to authorized study 
personnel, and may be made available to future researchers if approved for use by a 
review board that protects people in research. 
 
Confidentiality: There is the potential risk of loss of confidentiality.  Every effort will be 
made to keep your information confidential; however, this cannot be guaranteed.  The 
information we collect from you will be stored in a computerized database and will be 
assigned a number which is different than your medical record number. Only 
investigators and key personnel will have access to this information.  Your name and 
any other information that identifies you will be removed from any sample containers, 
and replaced with a coded number.  A list that links the coded number to your name, 
medical record number and date the sample was collected will be kept in a locked, 
secure location.  This information will only be known to people who are a part of the 
MCRC research staff, the MUSC Biomedical Bank or to future researchers if approved 
for use by a review board that protects people in research.   
 
E.  BENEFITS: 
 
There will be no direct benefit to you from participating in this study. However, it is 
hoped that the information gained from the study will help the research team learn more 
about lupus and scleroderma and may be beneficial to you or others in the future. 
 
F.  COSTS: 
 
There is no cost for your participation and you will not be charged for procedures that 
are specific to this research study.  In the course of your normal treatment you may be 
asked to regularly have blood samples taken and undergo regular physical 
examinations. Some of these charges may be billed to you or your insurance company 
because they are considered routine care for your disease (for instance, urinalysis, c3, 
c4 anti-dsDNA, platelets, white blood cells, hemoglobin levels). 
 
 
IRB Number: Pro00021985 
Date Approved 11/17/2015 
MCRC consent pts 8May15.doc Expiration Date: 11/16/2016 
Page 7 of 8 Version 05/08/2015 
 
G.  PAYMENT TO PARTICIPANTS: 
 
You will not be paid for participating in this study.  
 
H.  ALTERNATIVES: 
 
The alternative is not to participate. 
 
I.  STUDENT PARTICIPATION:  
 
Your participation or discontinuance will not constitute an element of your academic 
performance nor will it be a part of your academic record at this Institution. 
 
J.  EMPLOYEE PARTICIPATION:  
 
Your participation or discontinuance will not constitute an element of your job 
performance or evaluation nor will it be a part of your personnel record at this Institution. 
 
K.  RELEASE OF MEDICAL RECORDS TO ANYONE OTHER THAN THE 
INVESTIGATORS: 
 
You will be asked to sign a separate release for the release of your medical records. 
 
Results of this research will be used for the purposes described in this study. This 
information may be published, but you will not be identified. Information that is obtained 
concerning this research that can be identified with you will remain confidential to the 
extent possible within State and Federal law. The investigators associated with this 
study, the sponsor, and the MUSC Institutional Review Board for Human Research will 
have access to identifying information. All records in South Carolina are subject to 
subpoena by a court of law.  
 
In the event that you are injured as a result of participation in this study, you should 
immediately go to the emergency room of the Medical University Hospital, or in case of 
an emergency go to the nearest hospital, and tell the physician on call that you are in a 
research study. They will call your study doctor who will make arrangements for your 
treatment. If the study sponsor does not pay for your treatment, the Medical University 
Hospital and the physicians who render treatment to you will bill your insurance 
company. If your insurance company denies coverage or insurance is not available, you 
will be responsible for payment for all services rendered to you.  
 
Your participation in this study is voluntary. You may refuse to take part in or stop taking 
part in this study at any time. You should call the investigator in charge of this study if 
you decide to do this. Your decision not to take part in the study will not affect your 
current or future medical care or any benefits to which you are entitled.  
 
IRB Number: Pro00021985 
Date Approved 11/17/2015 
MCRC consent pts 8May15.doc Expiration Date: 11/16/2016 
Page 8 of 8 Version 05/08/2015 
 
 
The investigators and/or the sponsor may stop your participation in this study at any 
time if they decide it is in your best interest. They may also do this if you do not follow 
the investigator’s instructions.  
Volunteers Statement 
 
I have been given a chance to ask questions about this research study. These 
questions have been answered to my satisfaction. If I have any more questions about 
my participation in this study or study related injury, I may contact Dr. Gary Gilkeson at 
843-792-1991. I may contact the Medical University of SC Hospital Medical Director 
(843) 792-9537 concerning medical treatment.  
 
If I have any questions, problems, or concerns, desire further information or wish to offer 
input, I may contact the Medical University of SC Institutional Review Board for Human 
Research IRB Manager or the Office of Research Integrity Director at (843) 792-4148.  
This includes any questions about my rights as a research subject in this study. 
 
I agree to participate in this study. I have been given a copy of this form for my own 
records. 
 
If you wish to participate, you should sign below. 
 
       
Signature of Person Obtaining  Date  *Name of Participant  Date 
Consent 
       
 
Signature of Legal Guardian (if  Date  Signature of Adult Participant  Date 
applicable) 
 
*10-17 years of age: “My participation has been explained to me, and all of my 
questions have been answered.  I am willing to participate." 
 
  
Signature  
  
Age: Date of Birth: 
 
 
 
IRB Number: Pro00021985 
Date Approved 11/17/2015 
MCRC consent pts 8May15.doc Expiration Date: 11/16/2016 
