	  
PENN Medicine BioBank 
 
 
 
UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA 
RESEARCH SUBJECT INFORMED CONSENT AND 
HIPAA AUTHORIZATION FORM 
 
Protocol Title: Penn Medicine BioBank 
Principal Daniel J. Rader, MD 
Investigator: University of Pennsylvania 
(215) 573-4176 
Secondary JoEllen Weaver 
Contact: University of Pennsylvania 
(215) 349-5027 
 
Researchers are trying to learn more about cancer, heart disease, diabetes, and other health 
problems. Much of this research is done using human tissue, such as blood. Through these 
studies, researchers hope to find new ways to detect, treat, and maybe prevent or cure health 
problems. Some of these studies may be about how genes affect health and disease, or how 
genes affect response to treatment. Some of them may lead to new products, such as drugs or 
tests for diseases. 
We are asking you to let us store some of your blood and health information to use in these kinds 
of studies. Any adult who gets care at Penn Medicine may be asked to donate to this BioBank. We 
plan to collect samples on approximately 100,000 patients over the next 5 years. 
You can choose to take part in this storage project or not. This consent form gives information to 
help you decide. This form includes the HIPAA Authorization describing your confidentiality and 
privacy rights. Please read it carefully and take all the time you need to make your choice. Be sure 
to ask us as many questions as you want. Everyone who takes part in research should know that: 
• Taking part may involve some risks. 
• Taking part is voluntary. If you choose to take part, you can quit at any time. 
• No matter what you decide, now or in the future, it will not affect your medical care. 
WHAT IS THE PURPOSE OF THIS RESEARCH PROJECT? 
The purpose of the Penn Medicine BioBank is to collect and store blood and health information so 
researchers can use them in future studies. 
Your blood may be used in a variety of research studies including basic medical, translational, 
clinical, and epidemiological research. 
Some of these studies may use your DNA. Human DNA is organized in pieces called genes that 
provide the instructions to make our bodies work. Common diseases may be caused by several 
genes that work together. Also, your blood may be used for the measurement of markers that 
associate with disease or development of diseases. Some researchers might study the link of DNA 
and other blood markers with clinical outcomes, including response to treatment. 
Other studies may involve creating cell lines from your blood sample. These cells will be similar or 
identical to you genetically. Cell lines may be kept for many years and may be used to develop 
treatments for a variety of diseases and conditions. 
	   Version 1.2 – 7/22/13 IRB Approval From 2/20/15 to 2/19/16 Page 1 of 4 
	  
PENN Medicine BioBank 
 
WHAT IS INVOLVED? 
Your participation will take approximately 15 minutes of your time. If you agree to take part, we will 
ask you to sign this form. We will give you a copy to keep. Here is what will happen next: 
1. We will get a blood sample from you. We will collect up to 3 tablespoons of blood from a 
vein in your arm. This blood collection may be done in combination with other clinical 
procedures, or an additional needle stick. 
2. We will get some information about you and your health. 
§ We will ask you to provide some identifying information, such as your name, date of 
birth, medical record number and contact information. 
§ We will ask you for some additional information about you, such as your race, health 
history and family’s health conditions. 
§ We will get some health information from your medical record, examples include test 
results, medical procedures, images (such as X-rays), and medicines you take. 
§ We will use your medical record from time to time to update this information. 
3. We will store your sample and information in the BioBank, along with those from all the 
other people who take part. There is no limit on the length of time we will keep it. Your 
sample and data may be kept until they are used up, or until the Penn Medicine BioBank 
decides to destroy them. 
4. We will let researchers use the materials stored in the BioBank for approved studies. 
Researchers from Penn, other universities, the government, and drug- or health-related 
companies can apply to use the materials. A science committee at the BioBank will review 
each request. There will also be an ethics review. 
5. Some of your genetic and health information may be placed in scientific databases, along 
with that from many other people. Information that could directly identify you will never be 
included. Researchers who want to study the information must apply to the database. 
WHAT ARE THE POSSIBLE RISKS? 
The most common risks related to drawing blood from your arm are brief pain and/or bruising. 
There is a risk that someone could get access to the data we have stored about you. In some 
cases, it could be used to make it harder for you to get or keep a job or insurance. There are laws 
against the misuse of genetic information, but they may not give full protection. We believe the 
chance these things will happen is very small, but we cannot make guarantees. 
There is a risk that someone could trace the information in a scientific database back to you. Even 
without your name or other identifiers, your genetic information is unique to you. We believe the 
chance that someone will identify you is very small. But the risk may grow in the future if people 
come up with new ways of tracing information. 
WHAT PROTECTED HEALTH INFORMATION DO RESEARCHERS WANT TO USE? 
The researchers may want to use portions of your health information that they will need for their 
research. If you enter the Penn Medicine BioBank, health information that may be used and/or 
released include the following: 
• Name 
• Medical record number 
• Dates, such as date of birth, medical events, and follow-up 
• Address, telephone number 
• Blood/cells/DNA 
WHY IS MY PROTECTED HEALTH INFORMATION NEEDED? 
Your information is used by the research team to do the research, to oversee the research, and to 
see if the research was done right 
	   Version 1.2 – 7/22/13 IRB Approval From 2/20/15 to 2/19/16 Page 2 of 4 
	  
PENN Medicine BioBank 
 
WHO WILL BE ABLE TO SEE MY PERSONAL HEALTH INFORMATION? 
Access to your personal health information for this research study will be restricted to the following 
individuals: 
• The Principal Investigator and the Investigator’s study team 
• Penn researchers with approval from the Penn Medicine BioBank Steering Committee and 
approval from the Institutional Review Board (IRB). 
• Authorized members of the workforce of the UPHS and the School of Medicine and the 
University of Pennsylvania support offices who may need to access your information in 
the performance of their duties (for example, for research oversight and monitoring). 
In addition to the individuals within the UPHS system outlined above, coded data may be shared 
with external partners at other academic or commercial research laboratories. These external 
partners may include the National Institutes of Health or other multi-institutional consortia.  For 
external research, all direct identifiers will be removed; however, some indirect identifiers, such as 
dates of service, may be released. 
HOW WILL INFORMATION ABOUT ME BE KEPT PRIVATE? 
Your privacy is very important to us and we will make every effort to protect it. We will remove your 
name and other identifiers from your sample and information, and replace them with a code 
number. Only BioBank staff and approved Penn researchers will have access to the code. All 
people with access to the code must sign an agreement to keep your identity a secret. None of 
your personal identifiers will be shared outside Penn. 
Information that is shared outside Penn may no longer be protected by the federal privacy law  
called HIPAA. But it will be protected as described in this form and may be covered by other privacy 
laws. 
HOW LONG DOES THE AUTHORIZATION LAST? 
Your authorization for use of your personal health information for this specific study does not 
expire. 
WHAT IF I DECIDE NOT TO GIVE PERMISSION TO USE AND GIVE OUT MY HEALTH 
INFORMATION? 
Then you will not be able to be in this research study. 
WHAT ARE THE POSSIBLE BENEFITS? 
You will not get direct benefit from taking part. The main reason you may want to take part is to help 
researchers make discoveries that might help people in the future. 
ARE THERE ANY COSTS OR PAYMENTS? 
There are no costs to you or your insurance. You will not be paid for taking part. If any of the 
research leads to new tests, drugs, or other commercial products, you will not share in any profits. 
Your donation is a gift. 
WILL I FIND OUT THE RESULTS OF THE RESEARCH? 
You should not expect to get individual results from research done using your sample. If 
researchers determine that there is new information that should be shared with you, you will be 
notified. 
WHAT ARE MY OPTIONS? 
Taking part in the BioBank is your choice. You can choose to take part or not take part. If you 
choose to take part, you can change your mind at any time. 
	   Version 1.2 – 7/22/13 IRB Approval From 2/20/15 to 2/19/16 Page 3 of 4 
	  
 
0406186498  PENN Medicine BioBank    
 
 
WHAT IF I CHANGE MY MIND? 
Just call (215) 349-5027 and let us know. You may withdraw or take away your permission to use 
your health information or your blood sample at any time. When you contact us to withdraw 
permission, we will send you a form to complete so you can tell us in writing what you would like us 
to do with any of your blood that we have not already given out for study.  Your sample and 
personal data will no longer be used if you withdraw. However, researchers may still use any de- 
identified information or samples given to scientists before your request. 
WHAT IF I HAVE MORE QUESTIONS? 
For questions or concerns about this project, contact JoEllen Weaver, the BioBank Technical 
Director, at (215) 349-5027. For questions about your rights as a research participant, contact the 
University of Pennsylvania’s Office of Regulatory Affairs by calling (215) 898-2614. 
CONSENT STATEMENT 
The project staff has explained to me the purpose of the Penn Medicine BioBank, the procedures 
involved, and the risks and benefits. I have asked all the questions I have now, and I know who to 
contact if I have more questions. 
I voluntarily agree that my blood and information can be stored at the Penn Medicine BioBank. I 
understand it may be used in future research to learn about, prevent, or treat health problems. 
By signing this document, I am permitting the Penn Medicine BioBank to use my personal health 
information. I understand that the BioBank will disclose health information collected about me for 
purposes as described above. 
In addition, I have made the optional choices marked below. I know that I can still take part in the 
Penn Medicine BioBank, even if I answer ‘no’ to any of these options. 
1. Someone from the BioBank can contact me up to once per year to update my personal 
information. 
YES  NO     
(initials) (initials) 
 
 
2. Someone from the BioBank can contact me with offers to take part in other studies. 
YES  NO     
(initials) (initials) 
 
 
 
   
Name of Subject (Please Print) Signature of Subject Date 
 
 
 
   
Name of Person Obtaining Consent (Print) Signature Date 
 
For subjects unable to give authorization, the authorization is given by the following authorized 
subject representative: 
Authorized subject representative (Print) Signature Date 
Provide a brief description of above person’s authority to serve as the subject’s authorized 
 
representative.   
 
	   Version 1.2 – 7/22/13 IRB Approval From 2/20/15 to 2/19/16 Page 4 of 4 
