Medical University of South Carolina
CONSENT TO BE A RESEARCH SUBJECT
Bioactive sphingolipids in circulating exosomes in relation to the NMSC cancer-prone phenotype - SCAN Study

A. PURPOSE AND BACKGROUND:
You are being asked to volunteer for a research study. The purpose of this study is to better understand what causes skin cancer, and how skin cancer relates to other types of cancer. For this study, we are asking both people who have had skin cancer and those who have never had skin cancer to participate. To study this, we will compare three groups of people who have appointments at the MUSC Dermatology Clinic.  The first group will include participants who have had skin cancer and another type of cancer. The second group will include participants who have had skin cancer and no history of other types of cancer. The third group will include participants who have not had any history of cancer. You are being asked to participate in this research because you are eligible for one of the three groups being studied. We will study what factors may be related to the development of nonmelanoma skin cancer and other types of cancer. 

This research is sponsored by the Medical University of South Carolina. The investigator in charge of this study is Dr. Anthony Alberg. This study is being done at the Medical University of South Carolina and will involve approximately 170 volunteers. 

B. PROCEDURES:
If you agree to be in this study, the following will happen:

One-Time Study Visit:  If you choose to participate in this study the procedures described below will be done as part of the study visit and not as part of your routine care. At the study appointment: 
* You will be asked to complete a survey that asks about factors that could affect a person's risk of cancer. These factors include questions about your demographics (such as age and gender), lifestyle factors (such as diet and sun exposure), general health and medical history. This survey will take about 20 minutes to complete. 
* You will be asked to provide a blood sample by permitting a study team member to draw 14 mL of your blood (about 1 tablespoon).
* After the completion of the consent process this appointment will take about 30 minutes, which includes the time it will take to complete the survey and the blood sample collection.
Medical Record Review:  Your medical records will be reviewed to gather information about your general health not obtained from the questionnaire.  Information will be collected about the type of cancer, type of treatment received, and treatment outcomes of participants who have had skin cancer or another type of cancer.

Obtaining Data on Treatment Received and Cancer Treatment Outcomes: The Cancer Registry is the public health agency in South Carolina that is responsible for recording information about cancer cases in the state. Your information may be sent to the South Carolina Central Cancer Registry (SCCCR) to verify your history of cancer.  If you have ever had cancer, we will request information from the South Carolina Central Cancer Registry about the type of cancer diagnosis and treatment you receive(d). 

Maintenance of Biological Samples: We will use the blood sample you provide to look for components that may be associated with skin cancer and other types of cancer. We plan to conduct laboratory tests after we collect these samples. The blood sample storage and laboratory tests we conduct for the SCAN study will take place on the MUSC campus.

We also plan to store a portion of your blood samples indefinitely in the MUSC Biomedical Bank for future studies not related to the SCAN study. Genetic information (DNA) may be extracted from the blood samples and stored. This biobank works in a way that is sensitive to your confidential information. Your name and any other information that directly identifies you will be removed from any specimen containers. The information about your identity will be replaced with a coded number. A list that links the coded number to your name, medical record number and the date and time the sample was collected will be kept in a locked, secure location.  This information will only be known to people who are a part of this research study, the biobank staff, and to future researchers if approved for use by a review board that protects people in research. Your blood samples will be stored with this coded number so that it can be used to document that the sample came from you and can be used to link the samples to your medical record information. If you want to withdraw your samples, you must do so in writing to the investigator.  
The investigator's address is:
Dr. Anthony Alberg 
Department of Public Health Sciences
Medical University of South Carolina
68 President Street, BEB 103-S
Charleston, SC 29425

C. DURATION:
Participation in the study will require attending one study visit that will last about 30 minutes. Your study participation begins when you sign this consent form.  After your study visit, we will then review your medical records and perform laboratory tests on your stored blood samples. 

You may be contacted in the future to request additional information or to invite you to participate in a future study. 

D. RISKS/DISCOMFORTS: 
A. Loss of confidentiality: Because this study involves the collection of identifiable data, a potential risk is the loss of confidentiality. This means that you could be identified from the study information. To protect against this risk, a study ID number will be used in the study dataset instead of your name and identifiable information so that your study information is not in the same place as information that identifies you. So that we can link the various types of information collected in the study, we will keep a master list that contains your study ID, medical record number and name. This master list is kept separate from the study data.  The master list will be secured in a locked and secure place or on a password protected MUSC network drive.

B. Venipuncture: The risks of drawing blood include temporary discomfort from the needle stick, bruising and infection. Fainting could occur.

C. Genetic Research: Research to identify genes that cause or contribute to a disease or trait is an increasingly important way to try to understand the role of genes in human disease. You have been given this consent form because the Medical University of South Carolina investigators want to include your blood sample in a research project, or because they want to save such biological samples for future research. There are several things you should know before allowing your cells and blood to be studied or to be stored. 

1. Your blood sample will be stored under your name or some other type of identifier which could be linked to you.  Sometimes these samples are shared for research purposes with other investigators at other research sites.  If this is done, the other investigators would not know your name.
2. In addition to your name, other information about you might be connected to your blood sample. For instance, information about race, ethnicity, sex, your medical history, and so forth might be available to investigators studying your blood. Such information is important for scientific reasons and sometimes for public health. It is possible that genetic information might come to be associated with your racial or ethnic group.
3. Genetic information about you will often apply (in one degree or another) to family members. It is not generally the University's policy to provide genetic information about you to your family members. However, certain studies, called "pedigree studies", share such information among family members. For this and related research you will be asked if you are willing to share your genetic information with your family members.
4. You have the right to refuse to allow your tissue or blood to be studied or saved for future research studies. You may withdraw from this study at any time and remove any samples that contain identifiers from research use after the date of your withdrawal. This means that while the University might retain the identified samples-the law often requires this-they would not be used for research.
5. South Carolina law mandates that your genetic information obtained from any tests or from this research, be kept confidential. Our state law prohibits any insurer using this information in a discriminatory manner against you or any member of your family in issuing or renewing insurance coverage for you or your family. Our state law further prohibits our sharing your genetic information with anyone except in a few narrow circumstances, one of these being a research project of this type, approved by the Institutional Review Board and then we must take all steps to protect your identity. You will still be responsible for paying for health care, however. The Medical University of South Carolina will not be responsible for such costs, even if care is needed for a condition revealed during research or clinical testing.
6. Genetic research raises difficult questions about informing you and other subjects of any results, or of future results. Some people feel anxious about the possibility of having a defective gene that would place them or their children at risk. Some people want to know what is found out about them; others do not. The risks of knowing include anxiety and other psychological distress. The risks of not knowing what is found include not being aware if there is treatment for the problem being studied. But these risks can change depending on whether there is a treatment or cure for a particular disease, and on how clear the results are. If there is a medical reason to seek specific information from you, your doctor will tell you this. A process called "genetic counseling" is often appropriate in such cases; you should ask your doctor or nurse about this if you have any questions.
Investigators in this study may try to recontact you in the future to find out about your health. If you are recontacted and want to know what the investigators have learned about your samples, you should understand that the following are the kinds of things the investigators or your health team might tell you:
a) Information is too sketchy to give you particular details, but you will receive a newsletter informing you about the results of the project.
      b) You carry a gene for a particular disease that can be treated.
c) You can carry a gene for a particular disease for which there is no current treatment. This news might cause severe anxiety or other psychological distress, depending on the severity of the disease.
d) You carry a gene for a disease and might consider informing relatives that they, too, might carry the gene. It can be very difficult to decide whether to share such information with relatives. Genetic counselors can help sort out the various options in such a case.
Also, for any future research, we may contact you with a new consent form giving you additional information.
Are you willing to be recontacted in the future regarding this research study, future research opportunities and/or your samples?  Please initial your selection.
______ Yes		______ No 
7. If you are concerned about a potential genetic disorder, you and your doctor might choose to test specifically for it. This would require additional blood or tissue samples and would not be part of this research project. You should discuss this option with your doctor or genetic counselor.
8. The presence of a genetic marker does not necessarily mean that an individual will develop a disease. Informing people of all such markers independently of medical need can cause unnecessary anxiety. On the other hand, the absence of a marker does not mean that someone will not get the disease. Genetic diseases appear as a result of a complex mixture of hereditary, environmental, behavioral and other factors.
These are the best-known risks and challenges of genetic research. There might be other risks we do not know about yet. It is important that you talk to your doctor, nurse or genetic counselor if you have questions or concerns about the research study.
E. RELEASE OF MEDICAL RECORDS
The MUSC medical record databases will be the first source of medical record data.  In instances where patient information about cancer history is available only by accessing medical information contained at another medical care provider, the participant will be asked for permission to obtain cancer history information from the other medical facility. The study research team will then send a medical record request signed by the participant to the other facility to ask to obtain information about the patient's cancer history.
F. BENEFITS:
There will be no direct benefit to you from participating in this study. However, it is hoped that the information gained from the study will help investigators to better understand what factors are associated with skin cancer and other types of cancer. 
G. COSTS:
You will not be charged for any of the study procedures. The costs of all tests associated with this study and the storage of your blood samples will be covered by the study.
H. PAYMENT TO PARTICIPANTS:
In return for your time, effort, and travel expenses, you will receive a $50 Target gift certificate for participation in this study. 
If you receive $600 or more from MUSC (including cash, checks, gift cards or other gifts) during the calendar year, you will receive a tax Form 1099 and the IRS will be notified of the amount you received. 
I. ALTERNATIVES: 
The alternative is that you choose not to participate in this study. Your decision to participate in or opt out of this study will not affect your healthcare, medical treatment or health benefits in any way. 

J. STUDENT PARAGRAPH: 
Your participation or discontinuance will not constitute an element of your academic performance nor will it be a part of your academic record at this Institution.

K. EMPLOYEE PARTICIPATION: 
Your participation or discontinuance will not constitute an element of your job performance or evaluation nor will it be a part of your personnel record at this Institution.
L. RESULTS AND PUBLICATIONS: Results of this research will be used for the purposes described in this study. This information may be published, but you will not be identified. Information that is obtained concerning this research that can be identified with you will remain confidential to the extent possible within State and Federal law. The investigators associated with this study, the sponsor, and the MUSC Institutional Review Board for Human Research will have access to identifying information. All records in South Carolina are subject to subpoena by a court of law. 
In the event that you are injured as a result of participation in this study, you should immediately go to the emergency room of the Medical University Hospital, or in case of an emergency go to the nearest hospital, and tell the physician on call that you are in a research study. They will call your study doctor who will make arrangements for your treatment. If the study sponsor does not pay for your treatment, the Medical University Hospital and the physicians who render treatment to you will bill your insurance company. If your insurance company denies coverage or insurance is not available, you will be responsible for payment for all services rendered to you. 

Your participation in this study is voluntary. You may refuse to take part in or stop taking part in this study at any time. You should call the investigator in charge of this study or the study coordinator if you decide to end your participation in the study. Your decision not to take part in the study will not affect your current or future medical care or any benefits to which you are entitled. 

The investigators and/or the sponsor may stop your participation in this study at any time if they decide it is in your best interest. They may also discontinue your participation if you do not follow the investigator's instructions.
Volunteers Statement
I have been given a chance to ask questions about this research study. These questions have been answered to my satisfaction. If I have any more questions about my participation in this study or study related injury, I may contact Dr. Anthony Alberg, who is the study leader, at (843) 876-2439 or Catherine Staples, who is the study coordinator at (843) 876-5929. I may contact the Medical University of South Carolina Hospital Medical Director (843) 792-9537 concerning medical treatment. 

If I have any questions, problems, or concerns, desire further information or wish to offer input, I may contact the IRB Manager or the Office of Research Integrity Director at the Medical University of South Carolina Institutional Review Board for Human Research at (843) 792-4148. This includes any questions about my rights as a research subject in this study. 

I agree to participate in this study. I have been given a copy of this form for my own records. 

If you wish to participate, you should sign below.


__________________________________	   				_____________    
Signature of Person Obtaining Consent   						Date           


_________________________________    _________________________    ______________
Signature of Participant 			Printed Name of Participant		Date



Consent To Be A Research Subject							SCAN Study





Version 12/2/2013		            Page 1 of 3  	                                                                                                                              






