v 9.16
Princeton Institution al Review Board       SUPPLEMENT C – RESEARCH INVOLVING CHILDREN 
Principal Investigator:  
Study Title:      
Please complete if your research involves children (individuals who have not yet reached the age of 18). 
1. Children as Subjects
a. What is the age range of the children in this research?
b. Where will the children participate
   Home
  School
  University lab/office
  Other - Specify:
c. Will any of the research take place in school settings?       Yes       No
If yes, have you obtained the necessary permission from the school district?
 Yes  No (Attach documentation of permission)
d. Are any of the children wards of the State or any other agency, institution, or entity?
 Yes  No. If yes, provide details:
2. Allowable Categories
Check the category below that best represents the degree of risk and benefit to which the children in this study
will be exposed.  Note: more than one category may be indicated such as when a protocol involves both a study
group and a control group; in these cases, please specify.
a. Category 1: The proposed research poses risks no greater than that ordinarily encountered in daily life or
during the performance of routine physical or psychological examinations or tests (i.e., minimal risk).
b. Category 2: The proposed research poses a greater than minimal risk with the potential for direct benefit
to subjects.
c. How is the benefit to risk assessment at least as favorable as that presented by alternative approaches?
1 
Princeton Institution al Review Board       SUPPLEMENT C – RESEARCH INVOLVING CHILDREN 
d. Category 3: The proposed research poses a greater than minimal risk with no potential for direct benefit
to individuals, but likely to yield generalizable knowledge about the subjects’ conditions.
e. How is the risk of the protocol a minor increase over minimal risk?
f. How does the procedure present experiences to subjects that are reasonably commensurate with those
inherent in their actual or expected situations?
g. How is the knowledge to be gained of vital importance for the understanding or amelioration of the condition?
h. Category 4: The proposed research does not meet the criteria in the above categories but presents an
opportunity to understand, prevent, or alleviate serious problems affecting the health or welfare of children.
i. Provide justification for why this research should be approved:
3. Parental Permission
a. What permission will be obtained from the parents?
In general permission from both parents is required for research involving children unless one parent is
deceased, unknown, incompetent, not reasonably available, or when only one parent has legal responsibility
for the care and custody of the child.  For Categories 1 & 2, however, the IRB may find that the permission of
one parent is sufficient.
 Permission will be obtained from both parents, where possible  
 Permission from only one parent is being requested 
 A waiver of parental permission is being requested. Provide justification for a waiver: 
2 
Princeton Institution al Review Board       SUPPLEMENT C – RESEARCH INVOLVING CHILDREN 
b. If the research is being conducted in a group setting (e.g., a classroom), explain what provisions have been
made for children whose parents have not given permission for them to participate:
4. Assent from Children
Adequate provisions must be made for soliciting the assent of children when in the judgment of the IRB the
children are capable of providing assent and for soliciting the permission of their parents or guardians.
a. Please indicate whether the children you will study are generally capable of providing assent; evaluate age,
maturity and psychological state of the children involved.  Please be specific:
 All are capable:  
 None are capable:  Explain: 
 Some are capable:  Explain: 
b. Describe how assent is will be obtained, including what information will be provided to the subjects:
c. Describe how assent will be documented. Attach copies of all assent forms, if any.
3 
