Page 1 of 8         Version 05/20/2014 
 
Medical University of South Carolina 
CONSENT TO BE A RESEARCH SUBJECT 
MUSC Thrombotic Thrombocytopenic Purpura Registry 
 
A. PURPOSE AND BACKGROUND: 
You are being asked to volunteer for a research study. This research is 
sponsored by the Medical University of South Carolina. The purpose of this 
study is to observe patients with Thrombotic Thrombocytopenic Purpura 
(abbreviated TTP,) a rare disorder causing blood clots to form in small blood 
vessels in your body, to determine if any link exists between genetic (DNA) 
mutations and the risk of TTP. Another purpose of this study is to collect 
DNA samples for future research to learn more about preventing, 
diagnosing, and treating diseases.  This study will help researchers guide 
future research and learn how to improve the care of patients with your 
condition. You are being asked to participate in this study because you 
currently have TTP or have been diagnosed with TTP in the past. This study 
will be done by creating an electronic database, or registry, for MUSC 
patients with TTP so that we can gather as much information as possible 
about what caused the disease, how successful current treatment is and 
what can be done to improve the care of patients with TTP.  The investigator 
in charge of this study is Dr. Charles Greenberg. This study is being done at 
the Medical University of South Carolina and will involve up to 100 
volunteers. 
B. PROCEDURES: 
If you agree to be in this study, the following will happen: 
 
1. The researchers will review your medical records to gather information 
about your medical history and any factors that could have caused you 
to develop TTP. They will look back in your records to the point when 
you first developed TTP. They will also review your records periodically 
for up to 10 years from the date of your consent to see if you have 
relapsed. This information will be entered into the electronic study 
database for analysis. The researchers will be gathering the following 
data from your medical records: 
• Sex 
• Race 
• Date of presentation and discharge 
• Age of onset 
 
 IRB Number: Pro00021716 Date Approved 6/16/2015 
Expiration Date: 6/15/2016 
Page 2 of 8         Version 05/20/2014 
 
• Previous episodes 
• Symptoms 
• Factors that may have caused you to have TTP 
• Routine laboratory data at diagnosis, during admission and 
at follow-up 
• Treatment required for TTP 
• Complications from TTP 
• Follow- up information during remission or relapse including 
laboratory data 
2. You are also being asked if you would like to donate a small blood 
sample.  This blood sample donation is optional, and you do not have 
to donate the blood sample to be included in this study.  The sample 
will be used for genetic (DNA) testing for this study, and part of your 
sample may be donated to the MUSC Biomedical Research Bank for 
future research if you give permission for that.  The blood sample will 
be drawn from you through a needle in your arm, which will be 
scheduled at the time of a planned clinical blood draw in an effort to 
keep additional needle sticks to an absolute minimum.  Less than 2 
teaspoons (7 mL) of blood will be drawn in total for this purpose.  
 
a. Your DNA will be sent to an outside lab to be analyzed.  Your 
blood sample will be labeled with a special code that will not 
identify you to anyone outside of the study team. The results of 
the genetic analysis will not be discussed with participants. 
b. Genetic information (DNA) may be obtained from the materials 
and stored for future research.  Your samples will be used to 
gather information about you or your disease, including possible 
family disease genes and will be stored for future research to 
learn about, prevent, treat, and cure any type of health problem.  
Information and results about your samples will not be added to 
your medical records and will be stored in the MUSC Biomedical 
Bank.  This biobank works in a way that is sensitive to your 
confidential information. Your name and any other information 
that directly identifies you will be removed from any specimen 
containers. The information about your identity will be replaced 
with a coded number. A list that links the coded number to your 
name, medical record number and date the sample was collected 
 
 IRB Number: Pro00021716 Date Approved 6/16/2015 
Expiration Date: 6/15/2016 
Page 3 of 8         Version 05/20/2014 
 
will be kept in a locked, secure location.  This information will 
only be known to people who are a part of this project, the 
biobank staff or to future researchers if approved for use by a 
review board that protects people in research. Your materials will 
be stored with this coded number so that it can be used to 
document that the sample came from you and can be used to 
link the samples to you and to your medical record information. 
If you chose to withdraw from this study all of your samples will 
be destroyed. 
Please initial below, indicating if you choose to donate a blood sample for 
genetic testing and future, undetermined research. 
 
_____ Yes, I will donate a blood sample to be used in this study for genetic 
research. 
_____ No, I will not donate a blood sample to be used in this study for 
genetic research 
______Yes, I will donate a blood sample to be stored at the biorepository for 
future, undesignated research which may include genetic research. 
______No, I will not donate a blood sample to be stored at the biorepository 
for future, undesignated research which may include genetic research.  
 
Your participation in this study is voluntary. You may refuse to take part in 
or stop taking part in this study at any time. You should notify the 
investigator in charge of this study if you decide to withdraw. The address is 
Dr. Charles Greenberg 
173 Ashley Avenue 
Basic Sciences Building Suite 104, MSC 635 
Charleston, SC 29425 
 
C. DURATION: 
Participants that enroll in this study/registry will be enrolled for up to 10 
years from the time of enrollment, unless you decide to withdraw. This may 
be done in writing to Dr. Charles Greenberg. If you choose to donate a blood 
sample, your sample will be collected for future research and stored in the 
MUSC Biomedical Bank for an unknown period-of-time, or until it is used up. 
 
D.RISKS/DISCOMFORTS:  
 
 IRB Number: Pro00021716 Date Approved 6/16/2015 
Expiration Date: 6/15/2016 
Page 4 of 8         Version 05/20/2014 
 
1. Venipuncture: The risks of drawing blood include temporary 
discomfort from the needle stick, bruising and infection. Fainting could 
occur.  
 
2. Loss of confidentiality: There is a risk of loss of confidentiality of your 
protected health information. Every effort will be made to protect the 
confidentiality of your information. 
 
3. Genetic Research: 
Research to identify genes that cause or contribute to a disease or 
trait is an increasingly important way to try to understand the role of 
genes in human disease. You have been given this consent form 
because the Medical University of South Carolina investigators want to 
include your blood samples in a research project, or because they 
want to save such biological samples for future research. There are 
several things you should know before allowing your blood to be 
studied or to be stored. 
 
a. Your blood samples will be stored under your name or some 
other type of identifier which could be linked to you. Sometimes 
these samples are shared for research purposes with other 
investigators at other research sites.  If this is done, the other 
investigators would not know your name.  
b. In addition to your name, other information about you might be 
connected to your blood samples.  For instance, information 
about race, ethnicity, sex, your medical history, and so forth 
might be available to investigators studying your blood.  Such 
information is important for scientific reasons and sometimes 
for public health.  It is possible that genetic information might 
come to be associated with your racial or ethnic group. 
c. Genetic information about you will often apply (in one degree or 
another) to family members.  It is not generally the University’s 
policy to provide genetic information about you to your family 
members.  However, certain studies, called pedigree studies, 
share such information among family members. For this and 
 
 IRB Number: Pro00021716 Date Approved 6/16/2015 
Expiration Date: 6/15/2016 
Page 5 of 8         Version 05/20/2014 
 
related research you will be asked if you are willing to share 
your genetic information with your family members. 
d. You have the right to refuse to allow your blood to be studied or 
saved for future research studies.  You may withdraw from this 
study at any time and remove any samples that contain 
identifiers from research use after the date of your withdrawal.  
This means that while the University might retain the identified 
samples-the law often requires this-they would not be used for 
research. 
e. South Carolina law mandates that your genetic information 
obtained from any tests or from this research be kept 
confidential. Our state law prohibits any insurer using this 
information in a discriminatory manner against you or any of 
your family in issuing or renewing insurance coverage for you or 
your family. Our state law further prohibits our sharing your 
genetic information with anyone except in a few narrow 
circumstances, one of these being a research project of this 
type, approved by the Institutional Review Board and then we 
must take all steps to protect your identity.  You will still be 
responsible for paying for health care, however.  The Medical 
University of South Carolina will not be responsible for such 
costs, even if care is needed for a condition revealed during 
research or clinical testing. 
f. Genetic research raises difficult questions about informing you 
and other subjects of any results, or of future results.  Some 
people feel anxious about the possibility of having a defective 
gene that would place them or their children at risk.  Some 
people want to know what is found out about them; others do 
not. The risks of knowing include anxiety and other 
psychological distress.  The risks of not knowing what is found 
include not being aware if there is treatment for the problem 
being studied.  But these risks can change depending on 
whether there is a treatment or cure for a particular disease, 
and on how clear the results are.  If there is a medical reason to 
seek specific information from you, your doctor will tell you this. 
A process called genetic counseling is often appropriate in such 
 
 IRB Number: Pro00021716 Date Approved 6/16/2015 
Expiration Date: 6/15/2016 
Page 6 of 8         Version 05/20/2014 
 
cases; you should ask your doctor or nurse about this if you 
have any questions. In this study, investigators will not tell you 
what they find out about you, nor will they contact you if a test 
becomes available to diagnose a condition you might have or 
later develop. 
g. If you are concerned about a potential genetic disorder, you and 
your doctor might choose to test specifically for it. This would 
require additional blood or tissue samples and would not be part 
of this research project.  You should discuss this option with 
your doctor or genetic counselor. 
h. The presence of a genetic marker does not necessarily mean 
that an individual will develop a disease.  Informing people of all 
such markers independently of medical need can cause 
unnecessary anxiety.  On the other hand, the absence of a 
marker does not mean that someone will not get the disease.  
Genetic diseases appear as a result of a complex mixture of 
hereditary, environmental, behavioral and other factors. 
These are the best-known risks and challenges of genetic research. There 
might be other risks we do not know about yet.  It is important that you talk 
to your doctor, nurse or genetic counselor if you have questions or concerns 
about the research study. 
E. BENEFITS: 
There will be no direct benefit to you from participating in this study. 
However, it is hoped that the information gained from the study will benefit 
future patients with conditions like yours.  
F. COSTS: 
There will be no additional costs to you beyond what you would have for 
your routine medical care.  The costs of obtaining and storing your samples 
will be covered by the study.  
  
G. PAYMENT TO PARTICIPANTS: 
You will not be paid for participating in this study. Your samples will not be 
sold to researchers.  It is possible that your donated samples may result in 
new inventions or discoveries that may have commercial value.  You will not 
be paid for the use of any donated samples. 
 
 IRB Number: Pro00021716 Date Approved 6/16/2015 
Expiration Date: 6/15/2016 
Page 7 of 8         Version 05/20/2014 
 
H. ALTERNATIVES: 
The alternative to participating in this study is not to participate. Your care 
and treatment will be the same whether you participate in this study or not.  
 
I. STUDENT PARAGRAPH: Your participation or discontinuance will not 
constitute an element of your academic performance nor will it be a part of 
your academic record at this Institution. 
 
J. EMPLOYEE PARTICIPATION: Your participation or discontinuance will 
not constitute an element of your job performance or evaluation nor will it 
be a part of your personnel record at this Institution. 
 
Results of this research will be used for the purposes described in this study. 
This information may be published, but you will not be identified. 
Information that is obtained concerning this research that can be identified 
with you will remain confidential to the extent possible within State and 
Federal law. The investigators associated with this study, the sponsor, and 
the MUSC Institutional Review Board for Human Research will have access to 
identifying information. All records in South Carolina are subject to subpoena 
by a court of law. 
In the event of a study related injury, you should immediately go to the 
emergency room of the Medical University Hospital, or in case of an 
emergency go to the nearest hospital, and tell the physician on call that you 
are in a research study.   They will call your study doctor who will make 
arrangements for your treatment.   If the study sponsor does not pay for 
your treatment, the Medical University Hospital and the physicians who 
render treatment to you will bill your insurance company.   If your insurance 
company denies coverage or insurance is not available, you will be 
responsible for payment for all services rendered to you. 
 
The data collected on you to this point remains part of the study database 
and may not be removed. Your decision not to take part in the study will not 
affect your current or future medical care or any benefits to which you are 
entitled. 
The investigators and/or the sponsor may stop your participation in this 
study at any time if they decide it is in your best interest. They may also do 
this if you do not follow the investigator’s instructions. 
 
 
 IRB Number: Pro00021716 Date Approved 6/16/2015 
Expiration Date: 6/15/2016 
Page 8 of 8         Version 05/20/2014 
 
Volunteers Statement 
I have been given a chance to ask questions about this research study. 
These questions have been answered to my satisfaction. If I have any more 
questions about my participation in this study or study related injury, I may 
contact Dr. Charles Greenberg at (843) 792-4271. I may contact the Medical 
University of SC Hospital Medical Director (843) 792-9537 concerning 
medical treatment.  
If I have any questions, problems, or concerns, desire further information or 
wish to offer input, I may contact the Medical University of SC Institutional 
Review Board for Human Research IRB Manager or the Office of Research 
Integrity Director at (843) 792-4148.  This includes any questions about my 
rights as a research subject in this study. 
 
I agree to participate in this study. I have been given a copy of this form for 
my own records. 
If you wish to participate, you should sign below. 
                                                                 __________  
Signature of Person Obtaining Consent Date   
      
                                            _____________________ 
Signature of Participant Date 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 IRB Number: Pro00021716 Date Approved 6/16/2015 
Expiration Date: 6/15/2016 
