ART & SCIENCE OF OB-GYN P.C.
Raymond C. Lackore III, MD. F.A.C.O.G.
Obstetrics & Gynecology - Board Certified

 

1101 First Colonial Road 0 Suite 100 0 Virginia Beach, Va. 23454
Office: (757) 481 -3388 Fax: (757) 498-3889 Website: www.myobgynnet

INDUCTION OF LABOR REQUEST / CONSENT

I hereby authon'ze RAYMOND C. LACKORE MD and/or such associate(s) as he may select, to administer medication in an
attempt to help make my cervix soften, dilate, and "thin out" or efface in a process designed to simulate labor in pregnancy. I was
told that I could weigh the beneﬁts and risks and decide not to have an induction.

(Patient Initials)

My (Best Estimate) Due Date is: . My Cervical Exam is:

The speciﬁc reasons for my induction are (American College of Obstetn'cs and Gynecology recognized):

Pregnancy-induced hypertension, Preeclampsia, eclampsia
Premature rupture of membranes
Postterm pregnancy
Maternal medical conditions (e.g., diabetes, kidney disease, lung disease, chronic hypertension)
Fetal compromise (e.g., severe fetal growth restn'ction, isoimmunization)
Chon'oamnionitis

7 Fetal demise

7 Abruptio placentae

Logistic reasons, Iisk of rapid labor, distance from hospital, or psychosocial indications

(Patient Initials)

I understand that I have the light to seek a consultation from a second physician.

(Patient Initials)
I was told that the following alternatives may apply to me:
7Leave the pregnancy alone at this time accept the natural course, awaiting spontaneous labor.
7Rupture membranes and start pitocin to cause progress toward delivery.
7Use of prostaglandin tablet (Cytotec, misoprostal) to cause ripening and progress toward delivery

Use of Pitocin alone at ﬁrst and leave the membranes intact.

Other:

 

(Patient Initials)

© Lackore 2002-2007

I have been told that NATURAL LABOR AND DELIVERY may subject me to a variety of discomforts and risks.
Most patients (and their infant) in natural labor may experience natural problems ranging from minor to fatal. These
include nausea, vomiting, pain, bleeding, blood transfusion (including risks of hepatitis and AIDS), infection, poor
healing, vaginal hernias (weakening of the bladder/cystocele or rectum/rectocele), tears at the vaginal opening, tears
into the rectum, future painful intercourse, and risks of cesarean section. Unexpected conditions may occur in natural
labor including rare blood clots to the lungs, fatal amniotic ﬂuid emboli, unintended injury to other pelvic or
abdominal structures such as fallopian tubes, ovaries, bladder, ureter (tube from kidney to bladder), or bowel. Nerves
going from the pelvis to the legs may be injured. Hematomas of the pelvis may form requiring immediate surgery.
Any such injuries may require immediate or later additional surgery to correct problem. Following natural delivery
dangerous blood clots may fOI‘lTl in the legs or lungs. Following natural delivery or Cesarean section, physical and
sexual activity will be restricted in varying degree for an indeterminate period of time, but mo st often 4-8 weeks. I
understand that if before delivery I have had relationship problems, sexual problems, a psychological / psychiatric
disorder, these issues all clearly increase the risk of psychological or sexual problems after delivery.

I have been told that with induction of labor ALL OF THE ABOVE RISKS OF NATURAL LABOR ARE FULLY
PRESENT. In addition, with induced labor, there may be increased risks:

Contractions that are too strong (hyperstimulation)
Heart rate changes in the baby from stress

Failure to make progress in labor

Placental separation (abruption) with heavy bleeding
Need for emergency cesarean section

Fetal damage or death.

While most of the risks above are those of natural labor (including the risk of permanent fetal damage or death)
research has shown that induction may increase the risks mentioned above. Finally, I understand that it is impossible
to list every possible undesirable effect and that the condition or situation for which induction is done should justify
the risks taken.

(Patient Initials)

I understand that I will be in the hospital for approximately 2-3 days
(Patient Initials)

I have read and understood the information provided above. I have been given a full opportunity to ask questions and
have discussed this information with Dr. Lackore. The procedure necessary to treat my condition, the possible risks
and benefits, and alternatives of therapy that are associated with this procedure have been explained to me by
RAYMOND C. LACKORE MD. I am aware that the practice of medicine is not an exact science, and have also been
informed there are other risks which are attendant to any procedure, and I acknowledge that no guarantee(s) or
assurance(s) has (have) been made to me as to the result(s) that may be obtained concerning this procedure.

My signature below indicates I am willing to accept the known risks of induction.

(Patient Initials)

 

 

Patient’s Signature: Date:
Witness: Date:
Physician: Date:

 

© Lackore 2002-2007

