INFORMAT IONAL INFORMED CONSENT

PULPOTOMY (PERMANENT TEETH)
A PULPOTOMY is an interim tr eatment done with the intention of temporarily preserving a vital tooth without removing all of the
pulpal or nerve tissue. During a PULPOTOMY tissue is generally removed from the pulp chamber but tissue contained in the root canals
of a tooth remains. Complete removal of tissue from within the tooth is termed a PULPECTOMY.

I UNDERSTAND that a PULPOTOMY is performed as a temporar y measure in all but the most unusual cases in the attempt to
preserve the tooth for an undetermined period of time depending upon the circumstances for which the temporary preservation is requir ed
and that this treatment may include possible inherent risks such as but not limited to the following:
1.

Root canal treatment: Even though it is anticipated that this treatment may extend the time in which a tooth will remain vital until
furth er necessar y procedures may be successfully per formed at a m ore appropr iate t ime, it ma y be necessary to per form com plete r oot
canal treatment (pulpectomy) at any time if conditions should so dictate. Care should be taken not to unduly delay completion of the
root canal process. Referral to an endodontic specialist may be necessary as determined by the attending dentist.

2

Numbness: Ther e is th e possibility of in jury to the nerves of th e face or t issues of the or al cavi ty duri ng th e admi nist ration of
anesthetics or during the treatment procedures which may cause a numbness of the lips, tongue, tissues of the mouth, and/or facial
tissues. This numbness is usually temporary, but may be permanent..

3.

Fracture: Inasmuch as the crown porti on of the tooth may have been weak ened due to th e exten sive na ture of the pr ocedure and/or
that the tooth in jury or disease which necessitated this pr ocedure, the tooth may be more suscepti ble to fracture or breakage.

4.

Temporary crown: Should th e tooth structure which is remaining appear to be excessively fragile, it may be necessary to place a
temporary crown on the tooth in order to preserve it.

5.

Extraction: Should the tooth not heal, fracture extensively, or be unacceptable for having a complete root canal treatment
per formed, extraction of th e tooth may be necessar y.

6.

Pain: In most cases, once the pulpectomy has been performed and the initial pain has subsided, the tooth is no longer painful.
However, in some cases, severe pain or extreme sensitivity will persist. If so, it is th e patient's responsi bility to notify the dentist
immediately.

7.

I acknowledge that it is my responsibility to seek attention should any undue problems occur after treatment. I shall diligently
follow any preoperative and postoperative instructions given to me.

INFORMED CONSENT: I have been given the opportunity to ask any questions regarding the nature and purpose of having a pulpotomy
procedure perfor med an d have received answers to my satisfaction. I do volun tarily assume an y and all possible risks, includin g the risk of
substanti al har m, if any, whi ch may be associated with a ny pha se of thi s trea tmen t in hopes of obtaining the desired results, which may or may
not be achieved. No guarantees or promises have been made to me concerning my recovery and results of the tr eatment ren dered to me. The fee(s)
for this service have been explained to me and are satisfactory. By signing this form, I am freely giving my consent to allow and authorize Dr.
and/or any associates to render that treatment necessary or advisable to my dental conditions, i ncluding the administ ration and/or prescribing of
any and all an esthetics and/or m edications.

Patient's name (please print)

(Rev. 2/02/00)

Signature of patient, legal guardian or
authorized representative

Date

Witness to signature

Date

