Informational Use Only
CONSENT FOR DENTAL/ORAL SURGICAL TREATMENT IN PATIENTS WHO
HAVE RECEIVED BISPHOSPHONATE DRUGS
Patient Name :

Patient Chart # :

Today’s Date :
Please initial each paragraph after reading. If you have any questions, please ask your doctor
BEFORE initialing.
Having been treated previously with bisphosphonate drugs you should know that there is a risk of
future complications associated with dental treatment. Bisphosphonate drugs appear to adversely
affect the ability of bone to break down or remodel itself thereby reducing or eliminating the ordinary
excellent healing capacity of bone. This risk is increased after surgery, especially from extraction;
implant placement or other “invasive” procedures that might cause even mild trauma to bone.
Osteonecrosis may result. This is a smoldering, long-term, destructive process in the jawbone that
is often very difficult or impossible to eliminate.
Your medical/dental history is very important. We must know the medications and drugs that you
have received or taken or are currently receiving or taking. An accurate medical history, including
names of physicians is important.
1.

Antibiotic therapy may be used to help control possible post-operative infection. For
some patients, such therapy may cause allergic responses or have undesirable side
effects such as gastric discomfort, diarrhea, colitis, etc.

2.

Despite all precautions, there may be delayed healing, osteonecrosis, loss of bony and
soft tissue, pathologic fracture of the jaw, oral-cutaneous fistula, or other significant
complications.

3.

If osteonecrosis should occur, treatment may be prolonged and difficult, involving
ongoing intensive therapy including ho spitalization, long-term antibiotics, and
debridement to remove non-vital bone. Reconstructive surgery may be required,
including bone grafting, metal plates and screws, and/or skin flaps and grafts.

4.

Even if there are no immediate complications from the proposed dental treatment, the
area is always subject to spontaneous breakdown and infection. Even minimal trauma
from a toothbrush, chewing hard food, or denture sores may trigger a complication.

5.

Long-term post-operative monitoring may be required and cooperation in keeping

scheduled appointments is important. Regular and frequent dental checkups with your
dentist are important to monitor and attempt to prevent breakdown in your oral
health.
6.

I have read the above paragraphs and understand the possible risks of undergoing my
planned treatment. I understand and agree to the following treatment plan :

7.

I understand the importance of my health history and affirm that I have given any and
all information that may impact my care. I understand that failure to give true health
information may adversely affect my care and lead to unwanted complications.

8.

I realize that, despite all precautions that may be taken to avoid complications; there
can be no guarantee as to the result of the proposed treatment.

CONSENT

I certify that I speak, read, and write English, or, have used a translator to explain all of the previous
information to me and I understand all of the information translated to me. I give my permission and
consent to the procedure(s) proposed. I have had all of my questions answered and all necessary
information has been completed on this form prior to my initials or signature.

Patient’s (or Legal Guardian’s) Signature

Date

Doctor’s Signature

Date

Witness’ Signature

Date

