INFORMAT IONAL USE ONLY

Patient Name:

Informed Consent for Endodontic Treatment
1)

On (date)
, Dr.
discussed with me the following informed consent form for endodontic treatment of the condition(s) described below.

2)

The procedur e(s) necessary to treat the condition(s) have been explained to me, and I understand the nature of the
procedure(s) to be:

3)

The prognosis for this(these) procedure(s) was described as:

4)

I have been informed of possible alternative methods of treatment including:
a) No treatment at all.
b) Extraction
c)

5)

The doctor has explained to me that there are certain inherent and potential risks in any treatment plan or procedure. I
understand that the following may be inherent or potential risks for the treatment I will receive.
a)
swelling; sensitivity; bleeding; pain; infection;
b)
numbness and/or tingling sensation in the lip, tongue, chin, gums, cheeks, and teeth, which is transient but
on infrequent occasions may be permanent;
c)
reactions to injections;
d)
changes in occlusions (biting); jaw muscle cramps and spasm; temporomandibula r joint difficulty;
e)
loosening of teeth, crowns or bridges; or damage to existing restorations which may necessitate replacement
of the restoration;
f)
referred pain to ear, neck and head; delayed healing; sinus performance;
g)
treatment failure; complications resulting from the use of dental instruments (broken instrument-perforation
of tooth, root, sinus), medications, anesthetics and injections; discoloration of the fa ce;
h)
reactions to medications causing drowsiness and lack of coordination; and antibiotics may inhibit the
effects of birth control pills.
i)
further treatment may be necessary.

6)

It has been explained to me and I understand that the results of treatment is not guaranteed or warranted and cannot
be guaranteed or warranted.

7)

I have been given the opportunity to discuss this form and question the doctor concerning the nature of treatment, the
inherent risks of the treatment, and the alternatives to this treatment.

8)

This consent form does not encompass the entire discussion I had with the doctor regarding the proposed treatment.

Patient’s Signature

Date/Time

Doctor’s Signature

Date/Time

Witness’s Signature

Date/Time

