Caritas Good Samaritan 235 N-Pearlsmet
Blockton, MA 02301

Medical Center 500.027.3000

Informed Consent for Ob stetrical Management and Care
Dun'ng Pregnancy, Labor and Birth

SOHEIL HANJANI MD, FACOG, FACS

Pregnancy, labor and birth are ordinaiily normal physiological events and can be expected to provide a healthy outcome for
mother and baby in the majOIity of cases. However, there are complications that are risks of the natural circumstances of preg-
nancy, labor and biIth, such as toxemia, blood clots, hemorrhage, or infection, Which can be serious and could endanger the life
or health of the mother or baby. There are also risks associated With treatment of these conditions. These risks include the pos-
sibility of adverse side effects to drugs, allergic reactions and, if the administration of blood and/or blood products is required,
the potential Iisk of transfusion reaction and/ or transmission of infectious disease. I also realize that the additional risks enume-
rated below can be associated With the procedure(s) proposed for my obstetrical care.

CARE DURING LABOR AND VAGINAL BIRTH
The Iisks described may occur at birth or duiing the postpartum peiiod.

RISKS T0 MOTHER DURING THE NATURAL COURSE OF BIRTH:

1) Small tears of the vagina or the cervix may require the use of stitches.

2) If an episiotomy (incision into the ﬂoor of the pelvis) is performed to minimize the risk of tears, post-partum discomfort
occurs for a few days. Also, it is possible that the episiotomy may become infected and require treatment With antibiotics or
surgical drainage.

3) Tears into the bladder or rectum may result in difﬁculty With urination or bowel movements, and require treatment.

4) Dehydration may require intravenous ﬂuid administration.

5) The possibility of infection of the uterus eXists and may require treatment.

6) Retained fragments of the placenta can occur and require treatment.

7) Excessive blood loss may necessitate medication, transfusion or in rare circumstances, emergency hysterectomy.

8) Serious tears or inj ury to the birth canal may require treatment. This risk is associated With spontaneous deliveries as well as
those in Which forceps or a vacuum is used to assist biIth.

9) Formation of one or more blood clots in the veins of the leg or pelvis may require treatment. It is possible for the clot(s) to
travel to other organs (such as the lung or brain) and endanger the life or health of the mother.

10) VBAC - In addition to the above risks, a Vaginal Birth After Cesarean may result in possible trauma to the uterus, blad-
der, bowel or may be unsuccessful, necessitating a repeat cesarean birth. There is also a small risk (0.2% to 1.5%) of ute-
rine scar rupture during labor.

11) Later risks of vaginal birth include: pelvic organ prolapse, urinary or fecal incontinence, and sexual dysfunction.

RISKS T0 BABY DURING THE NATURAL COURSE OF PREGNANCY AND BIRTH:

1) Prematuiity, biIth defects, neurological problems, and infection to the baby are risks of the natural circumstances of preg-
nancy and birth. The natural forces of labor and birth are sometimes sufﬁcient to cause temporary changes in the shape of
the baby’s head (this is commonly referred to as molding or caput), and possible trauma to skin, bony structures and un-
derlying internal organs.

2) Fetal monitoﬁng or other means of fetal assessment may not identify all fetal difﬁculties.

3) If internal fetal monitoring by means of a small electrode attached to the fetal scalp is used, there is the possibility of a
reddened area at the electrode site. There is also the possibility of infection at the electrode site or of the scalp, Which can
be treated.

4) If fetal blood sampling is used, there is the possibility of bleeding at the scalp site, Which usually responds to pressure.
There is also a possibility ofinfection ofthe scalp.

5) If forceps or a vacuum is used to assist birth, there is the possibility of injury to the skin, bone or underlying internal
structures of the baby. This Iisk is associated With spontaneous deliveiies as well as those in Which forceps or a vacuum is
used.

6) If the baby is breast fed, the milk Will contain small amounts of medications the mother has received.

Mat-650 Consent Form (9/20/00W) Side 1 of2 011/23/11

Caritas Good Samaritan 235 N-Pear'swet
Brockton, MA 02301

Medical Center 500.021.3000

Informed Consent for Ob stetrical Management and Care
During Pregnancy, Labor and Birth

 

 

CESAREAN BIRTH

RISKS TO MOTHER:

1) Infection

2) Excessive blood loss Which may necessitate medication, transfusion, or in rare circumstances, emergency hysterectomy.
3) Inj ury to internal organs such as bladder or bowel.

RISKS TO BABY:
I) There is the possibility of inj ury to the baby during the uterine incision or during birth.
2) The baby may experience difﬁculty With respiratory function and require special care to help clear secretions and ﬂuids

from its lungs.
3) If the baby is breast fed, the milk Will contain small amounts of medications the mother receives

 

PATIENT AFFIRMATION

Dr Soheil Hanjani has explained to me the common procedures related to the management of pregnancy and birth Which may
include: assistance at vaginal birth, episiotomy, forceps or vacuum used to assist birth, cesarean section, use of drugs to stop
premature labor or induce labor, and fetal assessment including auscultation (listening to the fetal heart), use of electronic fetal
monitoring (external and/ or internal), and fetal blood sampling.

The following additional procedures and activities were explained:

 

 

 

By signing this consent form, I am indicating that I understand the contents of this document. I acknowledge that this informa-
tion has been discussed With my doctor and my questions have been answered. My signature below acknowledges that I volun-
tarily give my consent to perform the procedures described above.

 

Signature of Patient Date

 

SOHEIL HANJANI MD Date

 

Signature of Interpreter, if applicable

Mat-650 Consent Form (9/20/00W) Side 2 of2 011/23/11

