Page 1 of 11        Version 05/07/2013 
 
Medical University of South Carolina 
CONSENT TO BE A RESEARCH SUBJECT 
Cognitive Impairment and Obstructive Sleep Apnea Syndrome in Post-
Menopausal Women 
A.  PURPOSE: 
You are being asked to volunteer for a research study. This research is sponsored by 
the Medical University of South Carolina’s (MUSC) SCOR (Specialized Center of 
research) on sex and gender factors affecting women’s health.  The purpose of this 
study is to understand how obstructive sleep apnea syndrome (OSAS) affects memory 
and other aspects of brain function in early postmenopausal women. OSAS is a sleep 
disorder in which patients have abnormal pauses in their breathing during sleep which 
can be associated with a decrease in blood oxygen levels. OSAS has several adverse 
effects on health including heart disease, stroke, fatigue and excessive daytime 
sleepiness. You are being asked to participate in this study because you are a 
postmenopausal woman between 45-60 years of age, within 5 years of having achieved 
natural menopause and either have OSAS or have a high likelihood of having OSAS.  
Your participation in this project will help to see how well functional Magnetic 
Resonance Imaging (fMRI) can measure your brain’s activity as you perform memory 
and attention tasks while in the scanner. It is hoped that the data collected in this study 
will lead to future fMRI studies to better understand the impact of obstructive sleep 
apnea on the brain. Another purpose of this study is to collect blood samples (plasma, 
DNA and RNA) for future research to learn more about preventing, diagnosing, and 
treating diseases.  
The investigators in charge of this study are Dr. Chitra Lal and Dr. Jane Joseph. There 
may be other people on the research team assisting at different times during the study. 
The fMRI scanning is being done at the Center for Biomedical Imaging (CBI) on 30 Bee 
Street on the Medical University of South Carolina campus and will involve 
approximately 10 volunteers. 
B.  PROCEDURES: 
If you agree to be in this study, the following will happen: 
1. You will go to CBI on 30 Bee Street at a time that you have scheduled with one 
of the research team members. After you provide your consent, you will undergo 
the following procedures that take about 30 minutes: 
 
a. You will be tested for normal visual function using tests that an eye doctor 
would perform.  
 
b. You will fill out a questionnaire about what hand you prefer to use for different 
everyday tasks and will complete standard vocabulary tests.  
 
 
 IRB Number: Pro00025410 Date Approved 6/16/2015 
Expiration Date: 6/15/2016 
Page 2 of 11        Version 05/07/2013 
 
c. You will fill out a questionnaire asking whether you have any metal in your 
body as well as any other medical conditions that may need to be considered 
for you to enter the fMRI scanner, which will be used to take pictures of your 
brain.  The metal screening questionnaire will be reviewed by the individual 
operating the MRI scanner and if any risks are identified, you may not be able 
to participate.  
 
d. You will be asked to provide a urine sample to screen for pregnancy before 
going into the fMRI scanner.  If the results are positive, you will not be able to 
participate.  
 
 
2. After the screening session, you will sit in front of a computer in a quiet room at 
CBI to practice the tasks that you will be asked to perform while in the fMRI 
scanner. You will perform some brief tests of attention and memory for about 5 
minutes. You will practice two attention tasks for about 5 minutes and practice 
two memory tasks for about 3 minutes. These tests record how accurately and 
quickly you respond to visual stimuli and make simple choices and decisions. . 
 
3. After the practice session, you will be asked to perform simple visual and 
memory tasks outside of the fMRI scanner. This will last about 30 minutes.   
	  
4. You will be taken to the fMRI scanner by the research team member. In the 
interest of your individual safety, the safety of others, and to prevent damage to 
the equipment itself, you will be asked to remove all jewelry, body piercings, hair 
accessories, belts, wallets, credit cards, and loose change and leave these items 
with the experimenter. You will then be instructed about specific fMRI 
procedures, which include the need to remain still while in the scanner, the need 
to remain attentive and awake during the study and how we will communicate 
with you while you are in the fMRI scanner. You will then lie down on your back 
on a narrow bed, which will then be placed in a tunnel that is 6 feet by 22 inches 
wide and open at each end. The experimenter will take a few minutes to make 
sure you are positioned correctly, have on ear protection and are comfortable. 
After you are in the scanner, the experimenter will go  to the control room and 
communicate with you through an intercom system. The experimenter will be 
able to see you at all times and will check with you through the intercom to make 
sure you are ok. This will last about 5-10 minutes. 
 
5. Once the fMRI scanner starts, you will look at pictures or letters on a screen that 
you view through a mirror while you are laying down. Just like you practiced 
earlier, you will respond to the pictures by pressing buttons. You will try to lay as 
still as you can and try not to talk unless asked to do so by the experimenter. You 
will hear loud noises from the scanner. fMRI scanning will take 45 minutes to an 
 
 IRB Number: Pro00025410 Date Approved 6/16/2015 
Expiration Date: 6/15/2016 
Page 3 of 11        Version 05/07/2013 
 
hour to complete.  Once fMRI scanning is complete, you will be taken out of the 
scanner. 
 
6. A blood sample will be drawn from you by inserting a needle in your arm as part 
of the study on the second floor of the Clinical Sciences building of MUSC. Study 
personnel will take you from CBI to the Clinical Sciences building for this 
purpose. For this study, a maximum of three tubes of blood (30 mL or 2 
tablespoons) will be drawn. This process will take approximately 30 minutes 
 
The sample (plasma, DNA, RNA) will be stored in the MUSC Biomedical Bank for 
future research to learn about, prevent, treat, and cure any type of health 
problem.  It will be used to gather information about you and your disease and 
genetic information (DNA, RNA) may be obtained from the material.  Information 
and results about your sample will not be added to your medical records. The 
blood will be biobanked for future research and will not be analyzed as part of 
this study. 
 
You have the option to not participate in the banking of blood portion of the study. 
Do you wish to provide your blood sample for this study? 
 
________Yes   ________No 
 
Please read each sentence below and think about your choice. After reading 
each sentence, initial by "Yes" or "No." 
 
1. My sample may be used for genetic future research to learn about, prevent, 
treat, or cure disease.  
 
 
Yes _______ No_______ 
 
 
 
 
2. My sample may be kept for use in future research to learn about, prevent, 
treat, or cure disease. I understand this may involve providing the samples to 
other researchers. 
 
 
Yes _______ No_______ 
 
 
 
 
 IRB Number: Pro00025410 Date Approved 6/16/2015 
Expiration Date: 6/15/2016 
Page 4 of 11        Version 05/07/2013 
 
3. My sample may be kept for future research about other health problems (for 
example: causes of diabetes, Alzheimer's disease, and heart disease). I 
understand this may involve providing the samples to other researchers. 
 
 
Yes _______ No_______ 
	  
7. You may be withdrawn from the study without your consent if the researchers 
believe it is in your best interest or if you fail to follow study procedures.  You are 
also free to withdraw from the study at any time.   If you choose to withdraw from 
the study, the blood sample that has been collected and not yet used in research 
will be removed from the biobank and at that time will be destroyed.  No 
additional samples will be collected. We ask that you contact Dr. Lal in writing to 
let her know you are withdrawing your permission for your blood samples to be 
used for future research. Her mailing address is: 
 
Chitra Lal, MD, D-ABSM, FCCP, FAASM, FACP 
Assistant Professor of Medicine 
Pulmonary, Critical Care, Allergy and Sleep medicine, MUSC 
96 Jonathan Lucas Street, 
CSB Suite 812, MSC 630, 
Charleston, SC 29425 
           Tel : (843)792-7776 
 
C. DURATION:  
You will complete one visit that will last about two hours. Your blood sample will be 
collected as a one-time blood draw for future research use and stored in the MUSC 
Biomedical Bank for up to one year after the study termination. After one year the 
sample will be stored in the Pulmonary Division on the 8th floor of the Clinical Sciences 
Building at MUSC for an unknown period of time, or until the sample is all gone. 
 
 
D.  POSSIBLE DISCOMFORTS OR RISKS: 
1. fMRI: Because the fMRI machine acts like a large magnet, it could move iron-
containing objects in the MRI room during your examination, which could in the 
process possibly harm you. Precautions have been taken to prevent such an 
event from happening; loose metal objects, like pocket knives or key chains, are 
not allowed in the MRI room. If you have a piece of metal in your body (excluding 
dental fillings or some types of permanent retainers), such as a fragment in your 
eye, some types of tattoos, permanent makeup, shrapnel, or fragments from 
welding, aneurysm clips, ear implants, spinal nerve stimulators, or a pacemaker, 
you will not be allowed into the MRI room and cannot have a MRI.  
 
 
 IRB Number: Pro00025410 Date Approved 6/16/2015 
Expiration Date: 6/15/2016 
Page 5 of 11        Version 05/07/2013 
 
Having a MRI may mean some added discomfort to you. You may be bothered 
by feelings of claustrophobia. If you do not like enclosed spaces, you should not 
participate in this study. You may feel dizzy or nauseous if you move too quickly 
going into or coming out of the scanner. The scanner bed moves slowly to 
prevent this. The loud banging noise of the MRI scanner may bother you. 
Temporary hearing loss has been reported from the loud noise. This is why you 
will be asked to wear ear protection. You may experience dry or irritated eyes or 
discomfort from lying on your back for an extended period. Let the experimenter 
know if you need more cushions or support that will make you feel more 
comfortable. You may also experience boredom or sleepiness while in the MRI 
scanner. 
 
2. Incidental Findings: Brain images collected for research purposes as part of the 
study could reveal some type of brain abnormality or pathology. This occurs very 
rarely but could be serious. This study collects pictures of the brain for research 
purposes only and not for medical diagnosis. However, in the process of 
collecting brain images for research purposes, the experimenters may notice an 
abnormality. In this case, they will contact you and describe their observations 
and, if the CD was not initially requested, we will give the images of your brain to 
you directly.  You may share these with your primary care physician, if you so 
choose.   
 
3. Pregnancy: The risk of exposing an unborn child to a strong magnetic field is not 
known. Therefore, if you are pregnant, or suspect that you might be pregnant, 
you cannot participate in this study. Prior to your participation in this study, you 
will take a urine pregnancy test.  
 
4. Breach of confidentiality: The researchers realize that there are also non-
physical risks associated with taking part in this study such as the accidental 
disclosure of research data, which could result in such things as discrimination by 
employers or insurance providers.  The chance that research data would be 
released is very small and every attempt will be made to protect your confidential 
participation in this study.  Any information collected and results of behavioral, 
and MRI tests are coded with numbers and/or initials.  Your name, phone 
number, address (or any other information uniquely identifying you) will not be 
written on or associated with the information collected.  The investigator and staff 
are the only people who know your personal information (name, phone number 
and address).	  	  Information resulting from the research will not be entered into 
your medical records. 
 
Your health and genetic information obtained from your blood (plasma, DNA, 
RNA) sample will also be handled in a way that is sensitive to your confidential 
information. Your name and any other information that directly identifies you will 
be removed from any specimen containers. The information about your identity 
 
 IRB Number: Pro00025410 Date Approved 6/16/2015 
Expiration Date: 6/15/2016 
Page 6 of 11        Version 05/07/2013 
 
will be replaced with a coded number. A list that links the coded number to your 
name, medical record number and date the sample was collected will be kept in 
a locked, secure location.  This information will only be known to people who are 
a part of this project, the biobank staff or to future researchers if approved for use 
by a review board that protects people in research. Your material will be stored 
with this coded number so that it can be used to document that the sample came 
from you and can be used to link the samples to you and to your medical record 
information. 
 
5. Blood draw: Risks associated with drawing blood from your arm include 
momentary discomfort and/or bruising. Infection, excess bleeding, clotting or 
fainting are also possible, although unlikely.  
 
6. Other risks: In addition to the risks listed above, you may experience a 
previously unknown risk or side effect. 
 
7. Genetic Research:  Research to identify genes that cause or contribute to a 
disease or trait is an increasingly important way to try to understand the role of 
genes in human disease. You have been given this consent form because the 
Medical University of South Carolina investigators want to include your blood 
sample (plasma, DNA, RNA) in a research project, or because they want to save 
such biological samples for future research. There are several things you should 
know before allowing your blood to be studied or to be stored.  
 
1. Your blood sample (plasma, DNA, RNA) will be stored under your name or 
some other type of identifier, which could be linked to you. Sometimes these 
samples are shared for research purposes with other investigators at other 
research sites. If this is done, the other investigators would not know your 
name.  
 
2. In addition to your name, other information about you might be connected to 
your blood (plasma, DNA, RNA) sample. For instance, information about 
race, ethnicity, sex, your medical history, and so forth might be available to 
investigators studying your blood (plasma, DNA, RNA). Such information is 
important for scientific reasons and sometimes for public health. It is possible 
that genetic information will come to be associated with your racial or ethnic 
group. 
 
3. Genetic information about you will often apply (in one degree or another) to 
family members. It is not generally the University’s policy to provide genetic 
information about you to your family members. However, certain studies, 
called "pedigree studies", share such information among family members. For 
this and related research you will be asked if you are willing to share your 
genetic information with your family members. 
 
 IRB Number: Pro00025410 Date Approved 6/16/2015 
Expiration Date: 6/15/2016 
Page 7 of 11        Version 05/07/2013 
 
 
4. You have the right to refuse to allow your blood sample to be studied or 
saved for future research studies. You may withdraw from this study at any 
time and remove any samples that contain identifiers from research use after 
the date of your withdrawal. This means that while the University might retain 
the identified samples, the law often requires that the samples would not be 
used for research. 
 
5. South Carolina law mandates that your genetic information obtained from any 
tests or from this research, be kept confidential. Our state law prohibits any 
insurer using this information in a discriminatory manner against you or any of 
your family in issuing or renewing insurance coverage for you or your family. 
Our state law further prohibits our sharing your genetic information with 
anyone except in a few narrow circumstances, one of these being a research 
project of this type, approved by the Institutional Review Board and then we 
must take all steps to protect your identity. You will still be responsible for 
paying for health care, however. The Medical University of South Carolina will 
not be responsible for such costs, even if care is needed for a condition 
revealed during research or clinical testing. 
 
6. Genetic research raises difficult questions about informing you and other 
subjects of any results, or of future results. Some people feel anxious about 
the possibility of having a defective gene that would place them or their 
children at risk. Some people want to know what is found out about them; 
others do not. The risks of knowing include anxiety and other psychological 
distress. The risks of not knowing what is found include not being aware if 
there is treatment for the problem being studied. However, these risks can 
change depending on whether there is a treatment or cure for a particular 
disease, and on how clear the results are. If there is a medical reason to seek 
specific information from you, your doctor will tell you this. A process called 
"genetic counseling" is often appropriate in such cases; you should ask your 
doctor or nurse about this if you have any questions. In this study, 
investigators will not tell you what they find out about you, nor will they 
contact you if a test becomes available to diagnose a condition you might 
have or later develop. 
Future investigators may try to re-contact you later to find out about your 
health.  If you are re-contacted and want to know what these future 
investigators have learned about your samples, you should understand that 
the following are the kinds of things the investigators or your health team 
might tell you: 
a) Information is too unclear to give you particular details, but you will receive 
a newsletter informing you about the results of the project. 
 
 IRB Number: Pro00025410 Date Approved 6/16/2015 
Expiration Date: 6/15/2016 
Page 8 of 11        Version 05/07/2013 
 
b) You carry a gene for a particular disease that can be treated. 
c) You can carry a gene for a particular disease for which there is no current 
treatment. This news might cause severe anxiety or other psychological 
distress, depending on the severity of the disease. 
d) You carry a gene for a disease and might consider informing relatives that 
they, too, might carry the gene. It can be very difficult to decide whether to 
share such information with relatives. Genetic counselors can help sort out 
the various options in such a case. 
In addition, for any future research, the investigator may contact you with 
a new consent form giving you additional information. 
7. If you are concerned about a potential genetic disorder, you and your doctor 
might choose to test specifically for it. This would require additional blood or 
tissue samples and would not be part of this research project. You should 
discuss this option with your doctor or genetic counselor. 
 
8. The presence of a genetic marker does not necessarily mean that an 
individual will develop a disease. Informing people of all such markers 
independently of medical need can cause unnecessary anxiety. On the other 
hand, the absence of a marker does not mean that someone will not get the 
disease. Genetic diseases appear because of a complex mixture of 
hereditary, environmental, behavioral and other factors. 
 
These are the best-known risks and challenges of genetic research. There might 
be other risks we do not know about yet.  It is important that you talk to your 
doctor, nurse or genetic counselor if you have questions or concerns about the 
research study.  
 
 
E.  POSSIBLE BENEFITS: 
There are no direct benefits to you by participating in this study. However, it is hoped 
that the information gained from the study will help in understanding the impact of 
OSAS on memory and other aspects of cognitive functioning in early postmenopausal 
women and would lay the groundwork to perform future larger studies utilizing fMRI to 
study the brain in these patients. 
 
F. COSTS: 
There will be no direct cost to you to participate in this research study, other than 
transportation costs to and from CBI. There will be no additional costs to you for 
obtaining and storing your sample for future research. 
 
 
 
 IRB Number: Pro00025410 Date Approved 6/16/2015 
Expiration Date: 6/15/2016 
Page 9 of 11        Version 05/07/2013 
 
G.  PAYMENT TO PARTICIPANTS: 
In return for your time and effort, you will be paid $50 for completing this study. Should 
you choose to end your participation early, you will receive a partial payment of $12.50 
for each half an hour completed. Compensation will be provided by check, which will be 
mailed to you. 
 
You may also receive, upon request, a CD of images of your brain at no cost to you. 
These images are provided for your personal use. While these images have the 
potential to reveal a medical condition, only a medical professional can use them for 
diagnostic purposes. Please be aware that no medical professional has reviewed, or will 
review, these images as part of any Medical University of South Carolina research 
protocol or for purposes of making any diagnosis of your medical condition. If you are 
concerned that there is something in the images that warrants medical attention you 
should take the images to your primary physician. We will be pleased to provide 
duplicates of the images upon request of a medical professional, if needed. These 
images are not accompanied by any personal information about you, in keeping with the 
regulation that all identifying information about you is kept confidential and secure.  
 
Payments that you receive from MUSC for participating in a research study are 
considered taxable income per IRS regulations.  Payment types may include, but are 
not limited to: checks, cash, gift certificates/cards, personal property, and other items of 
value.  If the total amount of payment you receive from MUSC reaches or exceeds 
$600.00 in a calendar year, you will be issued a Form 1099. 
 
 
Your blood sample will not be sold to researchers.  It is possible that your donated 
sample may result in new inventions or discoveries that may have commercial value.  
You will not be paid for the use of your donated sample. 
 
 
H. ALTERNATIVES: 
You have the option not to participate in this study. Medical treatment for your condition 
will not change in any way due to your decision about participating in this study. 
 
 
I.  STUDENT PARTICIPATION: 
Your participation or discontinuance will not constitute an element of your academic 
performance nor will it be part of your academic record at this Institution. 
 
J.  EMPLOYEE PARTICIPATION:   
Your participation or discontinuance will not constitute an element of your job 
performance or evaluation nor will it be part of your personnel record at this Institution. 
 
 
 
 IRB Number: Pro00025410 Date Approved 6/16/2015 
Expiration Date: 6/15/2016 
Page 10 of 11        Version 05/07/2013 
 
K.  INVITATION TO PARTICIPATE IN FUTURE STUDIES:  
From time to time, we have other research studies for which you may be eligible to 
participate. We are inviting you to allow us to contact you by phone, mail, or both to see 
if you would be interested in participating in any future studies. By checking the “yes” 
box below, you are indicating that you would like to give us your phone number, any 
alternate phone numbers, and address so that we may contact you if another study 
becomes available for which you might qualify. To maintain your confidentiality, we 
will not leave identifiable information about the study in messages or mailings to 
you.  By checking the “no” box below, you are indicating that you do not want study 
personnel to contact you for any future studies. You may still participate in the current 
study if you check “no” and you will not suffer any adverse consequences in doing so.  
  
  Yes. I would like to be re-contacted for future studies. I give permission for study 
personnel to contact me by phone or by mail to inform me of other available studies I 
may be eligible for. By choosing this option I understand that my personal contact 
information will remain on file for up to 6 years. Please initial here_________. 
      
   No. I do not wish to be re-contacted for any future studies. By choosing this option, I 
understand that my personal contact information will not be kept on file after I complete 
the study. Please initial here_______. 
 
_______________________________________________ 
 
Results of this research will be used for the purposes described in this study. This 
information may be published, but you will not be identified. Information that is obtained 
concerning this research that can be identified with you will remain confidential to the 
extent possible within State and Federal law. The investigators associated with this 
study and the MUSC Institutional Review Board for Human Research will have access 
to identifying information. All records in South Carolina are subject to subpoena by a 
court of law. 
 
In the event of a study related injury, you should immediately go to the emergency room 
of the Medical University Hospital, or in case of an emergency go to the nearest 
hospital, and tell the physician on call that you are in a research study.   They will call 
your study doctor who will make arrangements for your treatment.   If the study sponsor 
does not pay for your treatment, the Medical University Hospital and the physicians who 
render treatment to you will bill your insurance company.   If your insurance company 
denies coverage or insurance is not available, you will be responsible for payment for all 
services rendered to you. 
 
Your participation in this study is voluntary. You may refuse to take part in or stop taking 
part in this study at any time. You should call the investigator in charge of this study if 
you decide to do this. Your decision not to take part in the study will not affect your 
current or future medical care or any benefits to which you are entitled. 
 
 IRB Number: Pro00025410 Date Approved 6/16/2015 
Expiration Date: 6/15/2016 
Page 11 of 11        Version 05/07/2013 
 
 
The investigators and/or the sponsor may stop your participation in this study at any 
time if they decide it is in your best interest. They may also do this if you do not follow 
the investigator’s instructions. 
 
Volunteers Statement 
I have been given a chance to ask questions about this research study. These 
questions have been answered to my satisfaction. If I have any more questions about 
my participation in this study or study related injury, I may contact Dr. Jane Joseph 
(843) 792-7683 or Dr. Chitra Lal (843)792-7776. I may contact the Medical University of 
SC Hospital Medical Director (843) 792-9537 concerning medical treatment.  
If I have any questions, problems, or concerns, desire further information or wish to offer 
input, I may contact the Medical University of SC Institutional Review Board for Human 
Research IRB Manager or the Office of Research Integrity Director at (843) 792-4148.  
This includes any questions about my rights as a research subject in this study. 
I agree to participate in this study. I have been given a copy of this form for my own 
records. 
If you wish to participate, you should sign below. 
 
 
                                               __                                     ___                  
Signature of Participant  Date Signature of Date 
Person Obtaining 
Consent  
      
   
 
 IRB Number: Pro00025410 Date Approved 6/16/2015 
Expiration Date: 6/15/2016 
