Project ID

(will be physically cut off after final consent reconciliation)

Consent Form

eMERGE Pharmacogenomics Study

Research Team

Group Health Research Institute



University of Washington

Eric Larson, MD, MPH



Gail Jarvik, MD, PhD

Lead researcher

Lead researcher

206-287-2534

206-221-3974



We are asking you to be in a research study. This form explains the details of the study. Please read this entire form before agreeing to join the study. If you have any questions about the study, you may contact the project manager at Group

Health Research Institute at 206-287-2150. You may also contact the researchers

listed above.



Why are we asking you to be in this study?

We are asking you to be in this study because several years ago you agreed to

give a blood sample to the Northwest Institute of Genetic Medicine Biobank. The

biobank collected blood samples and data from you and other Group Health

members to be used in future research. We also let you know then that we might

contact you in the future to tell you about about other research projects to see if you were interested. This is one such project.



We are asking you to be part of a different research study called eMERGE, which

stands for electronic Medical Records and Genomics. Group Health is one of nine sites across the country that are involved in eMERGE research. You can learn

more about this research online at http://emerge.mc.vanderbilt.edu.



You are eligible for this study because you still receive your care at Group Health.

We hope to enroll about 450 Group Health members in this study.



What is this study about?

We are doing this study to learn more about how genetic information can improve

medical care. Genetic information comes from our genes—the parts of our cells

that contain instructions for how our bodies work. Genes carry information about

traits that run in families, like blue eyes or brown eyes.



Certain differences in our genes may partly explain why some people are more

likely to get diseases like cancer, diabetes, and asthma. These differences are

called genetic variants. These genetic variants may also affect how well some

medications work for certain people. The study of how genetic variants affect a person’s response to certain medications is called “pharmacogenomics.”

In this study, we are looking at genetic variants that may affect whether:

 a person needs a lower or higher dose of a medication.

 a person may be more likely to have side effects with certain medications.

 a certain medication will work for a person or not.



This study will also look at different ways to place genetic information into a

person’s medical record. We think this is important because it could help doctors know in advance when a certain medication may not be the best choice for a

patient. We also want to learn how patients and doctors feel about using genetic information to try to improve medical care.



What will happen if you agree to be in this study?

If you agree to be in this study, we will ask you to give us another blood sample and to let us collect some information from your Group Health medical record. We will use your blood sample to look for genetic variants that are known to affect how people respond to certain medications. We will compare results from this blood

sample with results from the blood sample you gave to the biobank several years

ago. This second test is required in order to return results for your medical care.



If we find any genetic variants that might affect how you respond to a certain

medication, we will share that information with you and your primary doctor at

Group Health. Genetic information that is relevant to your medical care may also be added to your medical record. DO NOT JOIN THIS STUDY IF YOU DO NOT

WANT GENETIC INFORMATION PUT IN YOUR MEDICAL RECORD.



Here is what you will do if you agree to participate:

1. Read and sign this consent form. Keep the yellow one for your files.

2. Check that your correct name and consumer number are on the

tubes in the enclosed blood draw package.

3. Check that the five-digit number on the tube matches the number at

the top of the first page of this consent form.

4. Mail the signed consent form and completed survey back to us in the

enclosed business reply envelope.

5. Go to your local Group Health lab for a blood draw. Please take the

enclosed blood draw package and instructions with you and give them to

the staff at the lab. The blue instruction sheet for the lab is inside the

package. The blood draw should take between 10 and 30 minutes,

depending on your wait at the Group Health lab. Your blood sample will

032-2724-2014; Version 110.0 IRBNet #486548

2

then be sent to the study’s genetic testing lab. There is no cost to you for the blood draw.



We will send you $50 as a thank you after we receive your signed consent

form and the genetic testing lab receives your blood sample. If we don’t receive your signed consent form and blood sample within a couple weeks, we

will contact you to make sure you received this mailing.



If your blood sample is not usable when it is received at the genetic testing lab, we may ask you to provide another sample. If this happens, we will send you

another $50 after the testing lab receives your second sample.



What will we do with the results of your genetic tests?

Testing your blood sample could take several months. After we complete the

testing, we will send a report to you and to your Group Health doctor. The report will only include results that might be useful for your medical care.

 The report might contain positive results—meaning that we found one or

more genetic variants that could affect how you respond to certain

medications.

 Or, the report might contain negative results—meaning that we found no

genetic variants known to affect how you might respond to certain

medications. A negative result does not necessarily mean that you do not

have these genetic variants. It just means that this testing didn’t find them.

 The report will only contain genetic information that scientific evidence

shows may be useful for your medical care. But future research may

provide evidence about other genetic results that may be useful. If this

happens, we may send an update to you and to your doctor. But we

cannot promise that the study will have funding to do this.

Some of your genetic test results may eventually be placed in your medical

record. Currently at Group Health, there are only a few genetic tests that are being conducted and placed in patients’ medical records. These tests are mostly

related to the risks of specific diseases and are ordered by a person’s primary

care doctor. This study hopes to expand the use of genetic information by

exploring how genetic test results could be placed in medical records and used

by doctors when prescribing specific medications.

 If we place your genetic test results in your medical record, it won’t

happen right away. Over the next year or two, we will develop information

and tools to help add genetic results to medical records. Only results that

are approved by Group Health as being useful for your medical care will

be placed in your medical record. After results are placed in your

record, they cannot be taken out.

032-2724-2014; Version 110.0 IRBNet #486548

3

 As more research is done, Group Health may approve other tests of how genetic variants affect a person’s response to medications. If this

happens, these test results may also be included in your medical record.



How will we use your sample and information?

Your sample

Your blood sample will be labeled with your name, Group Health consumer

number, your study identification number, your birth date and the date and time

the blood was collected. This will allow us to link the sample uniquely to you.

Your sample will be sent to certified laboratories outside of Group Health for the testing, and your sample will be labeled with this information throughout the

testing process. Your results will also be labeled with your name and other

identifying information.



This is necessary because we want to return the results to you and your doctor

for use in your medical care, and possibly include some results in your medical

record. It is required by law for samples and results that are going to be used for medical care to be labeled and handled in such a way that they are linked to the

person who gave the sample and cannot be mixed up with the samples or results

of any other person. Even though the laboratories that will be doing the testing are outside of Group Health, they are bound by the same regulations that all

certified laboratories must follow in protecting your health information.



Because we want to keep the ability to return results in the future, a portion of your sample will be stored for future research in a certified laboratory at the

University of Washington, and will be labeled with your name, Group Health

consumer number, your study identification number, your birth date and the date

and time the blood was collected We may share portions of your blood sample

with other researchers for future research, but only after your identifying

information has been removed.



Your information

We will also create a research database to be used for this project and for future research studies. The research database will NOT will not have your name, or

Group Health consumer number. Your information will be identified only by your

study identification number. We will include in the research database the genetic test results from this study and analyses related to the genetic tests. We will also include health information from your Group Health medical record, including:

 your medical history.

 medicines you have been prescribed.

 lab and other test results.

 behavioral information, for example whether you have ever smoked.



032-2724-2014; Version 110.0 IRBNet #486548

4

We will collect this information from the time you joined Group Health until you are no longer a Group Health member.



In the research database, your coded information will be combined with

information from about 6,000 other study participants from health care systems

across the country. eMERGE researchers will use the database for future

studies about how a person’s genes affect their response to certain medications.

We may also share your health information with our partners at other research

sites.



Your genetic results and the health information from your medical record may be

placed into one or more national research databases, such as the “database of

Genotypes and Phenotypes (dbGaP)” at the National Institutes of Health (NIH).

This information would include your coded genetic information and also

information about your medical history, medicines you have been prescribed, lab

and other test results and behavioral information, for example, whether you have

ever smoked. Your name and other information that could directly identify you (such as address, Group Health number, or social security number) will not be

included. But because genetic information is unique to you, there is a chance

that someone could trace it back to you.



How long will the study last?

There is no specific end date for the research being conducted using blood

samples and health information from this study. But your active role in the study will end after you complete the blood draw and the survey. However, we may

contact in you in the future to see if you would be willing to answer questions about what it was like to receive your genetic test results.



Will it cost you anything to be in this study?

There will be no costs to you for being in this study. Just as if you were not in this study, you or your insurance company are still financially responsible for your usual medical care. This includes medical procedures, exams, or other tests or

therapies not required by this study.



Will being in this study help you?

We cannot promise that being in this study will help you. But it is possible that the genetic test results we give to you and your doctor will help you make better choices about medications in the future. It may also help you avoid some

medication side effects or complications. However, you may never need any of

the medications affected by known genetic variants. In that case, being in this

study is not likely to help you personally.



032-2724-2014; Version 110.0 IRBNet #486548

5

Overall, the knowledge we gain about how genetic variants affect a person’s response to certain medications may help many people in the future.



We have no plans to use this research for commercial purposes. Researchers

using the national databank may develop and sell new medical products. If this

happens, there are no plans for you to receive any of the profits.



What are the risks of being in this study?

 Blood draw: Having your blood drawn can be uncomfortable and can

sometimes cause a bruise. Some people may feel nervous or get dizzy. In

rare cases, a person may faint.



 Loss of confidentiality: We take every precaution to keep your information confidential. There is still a risk that someone other than the researchers could find out you were in the study or see your private study information, and this

risk may increase in the future. The steps we take to keep this from happening

are described on the next page. Please know that once information is in your

medical record, it cannot be removed and it may be seen by others who can

request legal access (for example, social workers or attorneys).



 Genetic testing: There is potential risk for genetic discrimination. Having the genetic test results in your medical record may increase the risk to your privacy.

Your insurance company may have access to this information, just as they

would any other information in your medical record. The risks of learning

genetic test results may potentially include emotional upset or insurance or job

discrimination.



A federal law, called the Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act (GINA),

makes it illegal for health insurance companies, group health plans, and most

employers to discriminate against you based on your genetic information.

All health insurance companies and group health plans must follow this federal

law, which protects you in the following ways:

 Health insurance companies and group health plans may not request your

genetic information that we get from this research.

 Health insurance companies and group health plans may not use your

genetic information when making decisions regarding your eligibility or

premiums.

 Employers with 15 or more employees may not use your genetic

information when making a decision to hire, promote, or fire you or when

setting the terms of your employment.



In keeping with the law above, Group Health does not use the genetic

information in your medical record to determine eligibility or premiums. However, 032-2724-2014; Version 110.0 IRBNet #486548

6

we cannot promise that all future insurers will not use genetic information from your medical record in some way.



Be aware that this law does not protect you against genetic discrimination by

companies that sell life insurance, disability insurance, or long-term care

insurance. Members of the U.S. military may not have the same protections

under this law. More information about GINA can be found online at

www.ginahelp.org, or you can ask a member of the research team.



How do we protect your confidentiality?

As described above, both the blood sample we collect from you and the results we

will return to you and your doctor by mail will be labeled with your name, Group

Health consumer number, your study identification number and your birth date.

This is to ensure that the results we are returning to you are really your results.

For the same reason, your sample that is stored for future research will be labeled with your name, Group Health number and other identifying information.



We are also creating a research database, to be used for this project and for future studies. In the research database your health information will be de-identified.

This means it won’t include your name, Group Health number, or other information

that is usually used to identify you. We will label your information only with a code number. We will keep the link between your name and your research code

number at Group Health and will not share it with other researchers unless you

give us permission. If the results of this study are made public, information that identifies you will not be used.



We have a Certificate of Confidentiality from the NIH. This lets us refuse to

share any study information that might identify you, even if we are asked to do so by a court of law. It is not likely that we would ever be asked to give out your identity. But because we are sharing some of your information outside of Group

Health, the Certificate serves as extra protection. The Certificate does not stop study records from being reviewed by some federal agencies. In addition, Group

Health and the funding agency may audit study records as part of study

oversight. The Certificate also does not stop you from sharing information about yourself or your part in this research.



The Certificate of Confidentiality only protects your study records. It does not protect your medical records. Genetic results that are placed in your medical

record are permanent and governed by the protections and rules that apply to

medical records.



How does HIPAA apply to this study?

Your health information is protected by a federal privacy law called the Health

Insurance Portability & Accountability ACT (HIPAA). Group Health must follow this 032-2724-2014; Version 110.0 IRBNet #486548

7

privacy law. According to HIPAA, the information collected by the researchers for this study is part of that protected health information. HIPAA requires that the researchers tell you the following:



By signing this form, you are giving Group Health permission to allow the

researchers to collect, use, and share the following information about you:

1. Your blood sample and your genetic information from the sample.

2. Your name, Group Health consumer number, and the information necessary

(date and time of blood draw, birth date, sex) to have your sample tested by

a certified laboratory and return results for possible use in your medical

care.

3. Your past, present, and future medical records, including your medical

history, medicines you have been prescribed, lab and other test results, and

behavioral information, for example whether you have ever smoked.

4. Research information collected from you as part of this study, including the

survey questions we asked you on the phone and any future surveys you

agree to do.



Who may use your health information for future research?

 The Group Health and University of Washington researchers involved in this

study.

 Our partners and collaborators in the eMERGE Network and other

collaborators who may become involved in the research.

 Researchers using national scientific databases, such as as the “database of

Genotypes and Phenotypes (dbGaP)”.



Who else may see your health information during this study?

 The Group Health Research Institute Institutional Review Board that

oversees the research.

 Your Group Health primary care provider and other Group Health doctors

involved in your clinical care.

 The laboratories involved in testing and the return of test results to you and your doctor.

 Federal and State agencies (such as the Food and Drug Administration, the

Department of Health and Human Services, the National Institutes of Health

and other US or government agencies in other countries) that oversee or

review research.



Your permission for the researchers to collect and share your health information

for this study will continue indefinitely unless you withdraw your permission.

032-2724-2014; Version 110.0 IRBNet #486548

8



Group Health requires that anyone who receives your health information from us

must protect your privacy. However once your information is shared outside

Group Health we cannot guarantee that it will remain private and it may no longer be protected by the Privacy Rule.

Do you have to be in this study?

No, being in this study is up to you. You are free to say no now or to leave the study at any time later. Either way, there will be no penalty. Your decision won't affect the health care you receive or benefits that you are entitled to.



Genetic tests for the medications involved in this study are available. You may

choose to pursue testing on your own. If you choose not to be in this study, your doctor will continue to make choices for medications based on the current

standards of care.



The research team can also end your participation in this study at any time

without your consent.



What happens if you change your mind later?

You may change your mind at any time. You can have existing samples destroyed

and data removed from the study research databases. If your genetic results are

already placed in your medical record, they cannot be taken out. Also if your data are already in a national databank, we may not be able to have the information

removed.



Location and Type of Information Sent

Data or Specimen

Data or Specimen Can

Can be Removed

Not be Removed





University of Washington: blood sample labeled

X

with name, consumer ID, date of birth





Group Health Medical Record: genetic testing

X

results





Local Group Health Databases: survey responses,

X

tracking information





dbGaP and Other National Databases: coded

X

genetic information and information about your

medical history



If you change your mind about participating, you may take back your consent by

writing to:



032-2724-2014; Version 110.0 IRBNet #486548

9

Eric B. Larson, MD, MPH

Group Health Research Institute

1730 Minor Ave, Suite 1600

Seattle, WA 98101



If you take back your consent, it will not affect your health care or benefits at Group Health. As soon as we hear from you, we will stop using your information for the study. We will ask our research partners at the University of Washington to

destroy any samples or information they have about you. If other researchers

have already used your coded information or sample, it cannot be removed or

destroyed.



Who do you call if you have questions?

 If you have questions or concerns about the study, please call the project

manager, Aaron Scrol, at 206-287-2150.



 If you have questions about your rights as a research participant, please

call the Group Health Human Subjects Review Office at 206-287-2919.



 If you agree to participate in this study, please read the following

statement and sign below. You must sign this form to join this study.



Statement that you agree to be in this study:

I have read this form, and I agree to be in this study. I do not have any

questions, or I have had my questions by answered by study staff. I have

been informed of the following:

 Being in this research study is voluntary, and I can leave the study at

any time.

 Study staff will protect my confidentiality as provided by law.

 By signing this consent form, I am giving permission for genetic test

results from the study to be placed in my medical record. I understand

that after results are placed in my medical record, they cannot be taken

out.

 The researchers may collect information from my Group Health medical

record in the future, which may be linked to information from my genetic

test results. This information will be shared with the other researchers

named above and placed in one or more databanks for use by other

researchers.





___





032-2724-2014; Version 110.0 IRBNet #486548

10

Signature



Date





___





Please PRINT your full name clearly





PLEASE RETURN THIS ENTIRE FORM

DO NOT DETACH THE LAST PAGE

KEEP THE YELLOW COPY FOR YOUR RECORDS





<PROJID>

(will be physically cut off after final consent reconciliation)



032-2724-2014; Version 110.0 IRBNet #486548

11





