Consent Form
TIV Inactivated Inﬂuenza Vaccine 2017

Before consenting to receive the influenza vaccination, please answer the following
questions. The information you provide below is private and confidential and will not be
used for any other purpose.

1. Have you had any adverse reaction to the Flu Vaccine in previous years? If yes,

 

describe response

2. Have you felt faint after an injection in the past? Yes No

3. Are you Allergic to thimerosal, eggs or egg products? Yes No
4. Are you pregnant? Yes No
5. Are you currently sick (do not include minor illness) Yes No
6. Do you have a history of Guillain-Barre Syndrome? Yes No
7. Do you have any questions regarding the vaccine or risks? Yes No
8. Are you over 65 years of age? Yes No

Contraindications for TIV Influenza Vaccine:
TIV should not be administered to the following people:

0 People who have had a severe allergic reaction to the following, unless the person has been
desensitized
0 Severe allergy to eggs
0 Severe allergy to thirnerosal
0 Severe allergy to a prior dose of an seasonal inﬂuenza vaccine (TIV 0r LAIV)
o TIV should not be administered to anyone under 4 years old.
0 Presence of a moderate or severe acute illness with or without a fever. Persons who were hospitalized with an
acute illness but who are now well enough to be discharged from a hospital can be vaccinated.

I have received information regarding the benefits and risks* of TIV Inﬂuenza Vaccine and agree to
vaccination.

 

 

 

Print Name Signature Date
Address (if different than Driver’s License) Date of Birth
Phone number email SSN or FIT ID#
Lot # Expiration Date Initials of provider

*Risks/Side Effects: Most common is soreness at the injection site, which can last up to two days but does not
usually affect an individual’s ability to perform normal daily activities. Some people may notice mild fever,
fatigue and muscles weakness that may last up to two days. Tylenol or ibuprofen products can be used to
reduce these symptoms. Much less common side effects (one to two cases per million vaccinated) include
allergic reactions and Guillain-Barre’ syndrome (GBS).

Premier P h r

Primary Care

 

