Greenwich Central School District

 

HEPATITIS B VACCINATION
CONSENT FORM

Option A: I understand the benefits and risks of hepatitis B vaccination. I understand that I must receive at least 3
intramuscular doses of vaccine in the arm over a 6—month Penod to confer immunity. However, as with all medical
treatment, there is no guarantee that I will become immune or that I will not experience an adverse side effect from the
vaccine. 1 do understand that anyone with a known allergy to yeast should not accept this vaccine. Hepatitis B vaccine
will be made available at no charge to employees having occupational blood exposure. I have had an opportunity to ask
questions, and all my questions have been answered to my satisfaction. I believe that I have adequate knowledge upon
which to base an informed consent. I understand that Participation is voluntary and my consent or refusal of vaccination
does not waive any rights under my employment contracts. In addition, I can withdraw from the vaccination regimen at
anytime.

I desire that my employer Provide the required three (3) doses of Hepatitis B vaccine.

 

 

Print Name Last 4- Digits of Social Security #

 

 

Date Signature

If you sign this form because you want the HBV vaccination, then send the completed form Within the next 10 days to:

|ulie Mosher, RN, High School Nurse, 10 Gray Avenue, Greenwich, NY 12834, Phone: 692-9542 X4222.

 

 

 

HEPATITIS B VACCINATION
DECLINATION FORM

Option B: I understand that due to my occupational exposure to blood or other Potentially infectious materials, I may be
at nsk of acquinng hepatitis B Virus (HBV) infection. I have been given the opportunity to be vaccinated with hepatitis B
vaccine, at no charge to myself. However, I decline hepatitis B vaccination at this time. I understand that by declining this
vaccine, 1 continue to be at risk of acquiring hepatitis B, a senous disease. If in the future I continue to have occupational
exposure to blood or other Potentially infectious materials and I want to be vaccinated with hepatitis B vaccine, 1 can
receive the vaccination series at no charge to me.

 

 

Print Name Last 4- Digits of Social Security #

 

 

Date Signature

 

Option C: If you have already had the hepatitis B vaccine series, then you do not need another vaccine. Please ﬁll out the
following information:

 

I have received the Hepatitis B vaccination on:
1St Shot: Day 1 2”:1 Shot: Day 30 3rd Shot: Day 180

 

 

Print Name Last 4- Digits of Social Security #

 

 

Date Signature

If you sign this form because you do not want 01' need the HBV vaccination, then send the completed form within the next

10 days to: Mike Hernandez, Superintendent of Buildings & Grounds, 10 Gray Avenue, Greenwich, NY 12834, Phone: 692-
9542 X2280.

 

 

