SAMPLE INFORMED CONSENT LANGUAGE



Please Note: This document is meant solely to provide an example of the language that is necessary for banking of samples and clinical data into the NINDS Human Genetics Resource Center (also known as the NINDS

Repository). This is not an informed consent form in and of itself and cannot be used without local IRB approval.



For additional guidelines PLEASE VISIT the OHRP website:



http://www.nihtraining.com/ohsrsite/info/sheet6.html



SAMPLES AND CLINICAL DATA FOR SUBMISSION TO NINDS REPOSITORY



We invite you to take part in a research study at the NAME OF INSTITUTION. Before you decide to take part, please take as much time as you need to ask any questions and discuss this study. The overall goal of the National Institute for Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS) Repository is to establish a bank of samples from individuals with neurological diseases and controls. This bank will allow for distribution of DNA to scientists to help learn more about neurological diseases and many other diseases.



Who is eligible for this study?



ADD ADDITIONAL DETAILS OF INCLUSION AND EXCLUSION CRITERIA AS

APPROPRIATE



Individuals who wish to help us learn more about risks and causes of neurological and other medical disorders are invited to participate in this study.



What procedures will be done for research purposes?



ADD ADDITIONAL DESCRIPTIONS HERE RE: SPECIFIC STUDY BEING DONE.



We will collect information about your medical history and any illnesses that run in the family (family history). You will undergo a physical examination that may include memory testing. We will draw about 20 cc (2 tablespoons) of blood from your arm.



What are the risks to you in being in this research?



ADD ADDITIONAL INFORMATION REGARDING RISKS OF YOUR PARTICULAR PROJECT



During blood draw, you may experience some discomfort or transient pain at the site of needle entry into the vein as you might during any blood draw. There is a remote risk of fainting.

Infection could occur at the place where the needle goes into the arm. However, we will take all available precautions to prevent an infection using sterile technique.



By donating blood to a study in which we are going to try to discover more about the genetic risks of Neurological disorders, you may be concerned about receiving or not receiving genetics results. Normally you will not receive results under this study (CLARIFY FOR SPECIFIC

STUDIES).



There is a risk that someone could use information from the sample you submitted, via DNA, to identify you if it were matched with another DNA sample provided by you. However, any user of this sample must agree not to use it for that purpose, and the risk, while real, is small.



More Information about the NINDS Repository at the Coriell Cell Repositories Operation of the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS) Repository at the Coriell Cell Repositories



Your blood sample and de-identified medical and family history information will be sent to the NLNDS Repository at Coriell. The Coriell Cell Repositories in Camden, NJ, collects, stores and distributes medical research information such as your age, gender, and diagnosis, information about your medical history, and cell cultures and DNA samples to researchers in a masked fashion. The blood sample will have an identification number which is unrelated to your medical record number, date of birth, or any other identifying information and cannot be tracked back to you. White blood cells will be used to make a cell line and DNA. Cell lines allow us to have a source of the DNA without having to redraw your blood. These blood cells can be stored for decades or more.



Specific Types of Research Conducted by the NINDS Repository



Your donated blood sample and some medical history and family history information will be used for research about genetic factors. They will be made available, in a de-identified manner, via the Coriell website to other researchers studying a variety of medical conditions.

Additionally, your DNA and cell line will be shared with other researchers. While your DNA may be used for research of neurological diseases, it may also be used for research for other diseases. The NINDS Repository at Coriell does not perform genetic testing services and therefore will not return genetic research results to any individual research participant. Since other researchers do not know your identity, you will never receive any genetic information determined using your sample.



Conditions under Which Data and Specimens are Released From the NINDS Repository This sample and masked data will be available to researchers at hospitals, universities, and commercial organizations. Some of these will pay a fee in order to withdraw this sample from the Repository. Every researcher who withdraws a sample and/or other information must sign an agreement that they will not make any effort to learn your identify.



Arrangements for Protection of Your Identity and other Private Information at the NINDS

Repository



No information that can be used to identify you will be available from the NINDS Repository at Coriell. Your blood or tissue specimen will be given a code number, your name will be removed prior to shipment to the Coriell Cell Repositories and any local identifiers will be removed.

Additionally, a Certificate of Confidentiality protecting the identity of research subjects has been issued by the National Institutes of Health to the NINDS Repository at Coriell to protect the privacy of research subjects. All correspondence between the Repository and the researchers is done by referring to the unique repository number, not the laboratory or clinic number, as an additional safeguard to privacy. When results of a research study are reported in medical journals or at scientific meetings, the people who take part are not named and identified.



Certificate of Confidentiality



We will do everything we can to keep others from learning about your participation in the NINDS Repository. To further help protect your privacy, the Repository has obtained a Certificate of Confidentiality from the Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS). With this certificate, the NINDS Repository cannot be forced (for example, by court subpoena) to disclose information that may identify you in a federal, state, or local civil, criminal, administrative, or other proceedings. Disclosure will be necessary, however, upon request of DHHS for the purpose of audit or evaluation.



You should understand that a Certificate of Confidentiality does not prevent you or a member of your family from voluntarily releasing information about yourself or your involvement in this research. Note, however, that if an insurer or employer learns about your participation, and obtains your consent to receive research information, the NINDS Repository may not use the Certificate of Confidentiality to withhold this information. This means that you and your family must also actively protect your own privacy.



Finally, you should understand that the NINDS Repository is not prevented from taking steps, including reporting to authorities, to prevent serious harm to yourself or others.





What happens if you decide you no longer want to participate in this research?



You have the right to withdraw from this research project at any time. If possible, any samples you have contributed will be discarded if you request this; however, because of the sample masking, we may not always be able to identify which samples were donated by you. Your withdrawal from the study will in no way affect access to medical care for which you are otherwise eligible.



Alternatives to Participation



ADD ANY ALTERNATIVES HERE.



Benefits



ADD ANY ADDITIONAL BENEFITS OF THE SPECIFIC STUDY HERE.

There are no direct benefits to you for participating in the Repository collection. This study may improve our understanding of genetic risk factors for Neurological and other illnesses; you may experience positive feelings from contributing to this effort.



Whom To Contact with Questions



If you have any problems or questions about this study, or about your rights as a research participant, or about any research-related injury, contact the Principal Investigator, PRINCIPAL

Investigator NAME HERE. Other researchers you may call are: OTHER CONTACT

INFORMATION HERE. Please keep a copy of this document in case you want to read it again.



I have read the explanation about this study and have been given the opportunity to discuss it and to ask questions. I hereby consent to take part in this study.



Signature of Subject/Legal Representative Date





Signature of Witness





Signature of individual obtaining Consent



Title





Date





