State of Illinois - Migrant & Seasonal Head Start
Department of Human Services

PARENTAL CONSENT FORM FOR DENTAL TREATMENT
Date

Child's Name
Date of Birth

Your child is in need of some basic dental care. This form explains the care that your child needs, and requests your
permission to provide that care.
Tooth/Teeth
Dental Fillings:
Decay dissolves the tooth, and if not treated, will result in an abscessed tooth causing pain and infection. The
dentist will remove the decayed and weakened part of the tooth and replace it with a silver alloy or tooth colored
material to strengthen the tooth. A local anesthetic may be used that will "numb" the area being treated
for one or two hours.
Sealants:

Tooth/Teeth

Back teeth have grooves and pits in which decay usually starts. The dentist or hygienist will "seal" the grooves
with a plastic coating to help prevent the decay from starting. No anesthetic is needed.
Tooth/Teeth
Stainless Steel Crowns:
If a tooth is badly destroyed by decay, a filling will not stay in place. Therefore, a tooth is trimmed around the
sides and a preformed crown or "cap" is placed over the tooth to protect it from breaking. As with fillings, the
area is usually treated with an anesthetic to help the child remain comfortable for one to two hours.
Tooth/Teeth
Nerve or Pulp Treatment:
When the decay or infection progresses far enough that the tissue inside the tooth is infected, all or part of that infected
tissue must be removed and a special filling placed in order to keep the infection from spreading to other parts of the
body. The treatment usually takes at least two visits during which an anesthetic will be used. Pain or swelling
after this work is rare and usually minor. Antibiotics may be used to control possible infections. After treatment, a
filling or crown will be placed to help strengthen the tooth and keep it from breaking.
Tooth/Teeth
Extraction or Removal of the Tooth:
If the infection has spread too far to rebuild the tooth, it is often best to remove the tooth to prevent infection from
spreading. After "numbing" the area with anesthetics, the tooth is removed and the area packed with gauze to control
bleeding. Care should be taken not to rinse for a couple of days or bleeding may begin again. Biting on gauze or
towels will usually stop the bleeding. Pain or swelling after this work is rare and usually minor.
Nitrous Oxide and/or Premedication:
If a child is particularly nervous about dental treatment, the dentist may use "laughing gas" (nitrous oxide) or some
other medication to help relax the child so the work can be done properly. The medications may cause the child
to be drowsy after the appointment.

We expect the child will need approximately

appointment(s) to complete this work.

I understand that my child

needs to receive the dental services explained

and checked above from,
I give my consent for all these services.

(Name of Dentist)

I give my consent for all services except
I do not give my consent for any of these services.
My Consent for these services expires
Signature

Date
(Parent/Guardian)

IL444-4078 (R-7-09)

Complete when child
needs dental treatment,
before treatment is given.
Page 1 of 1

