NIGMS HUMAN GENETIC CELL REPOSITORY



INFORMED CONSENT FORM

*Submitters associated with an organization overseen by an Institutional Review Board (IRB) MUST use an

Informed Consent Form approved by their own IRB that includes, at a minimum, the elements in this form.

Overview of the NIGMS Human Genetic Cell Repository

The NIGMS Human Genetic Cell Repository (“NIGMS Repository”), a research resource supported by the

National Institutes of Health, collects, stores, and distributes cell cultures, DNA samples and associated de-identified data from individuals with many kinds of disorders, from unaffected family members of

these individuals, and from other healthy people. The purpose of this col ection is to make specimens

available for use in research and teaching and as reference material for use in clinical genetics

laboratories. Submission of samples to the NIGMS Repository may result in valuable research materials

that can be used by scientists to better understand normal and disease processes, and to develop new

diagnostic tests, new treatments, and new ways to prevent diseases.

Sample Collection

The NIGMS Repository col ects blood and biopsy samples. I can choose to donate a blood sample, a skin

biopsy sample, or both to the NIGMS Repository.

Potential Uses of My Sample

The cells and/or DNA derived from my sample may be distributed to scientists for many different types

of research. The cells from my sample may also be used to create modified cell lines or may be

reprogrammed to create induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells to advance research in stem cell biology.

Scientists may use my sample(s) donated to the NIGMS Repository to study my DNA and may share

what they learn with other scientists. Data resulting from the use of my sample may be used in a

research publication. In that event, my name or other personally identifying information will not be

included, as this information is not available to the scientists. I will not be provided with any specific information or results generated from research using my specimen. However, there is a small possibility

that I could learn that a sample described in research came from me and indirectly learn information

about my sample.

In addition to al owing scientists to share data about my sample(s) with each other, I also have the

option (on Page 4 of this Informed Consent Form) to allow more extensive genetic data from my

sample(s) to be made publically available to anyone who wishes to use it. My name and other personal

identifiers will not be linked with my data. Making extensive genetic data publically available has the

potential to enable more people to study the data and speed up the pace of research. It is possible that NIGMS HGCR Informed Consent Form



Page 1 of 4

Form 1401-63 Rev E - 072015





a treatment or cure for a disease could be discovered more quickly if the data is publically available than if it is shared only between scientists.

Scientists are strictly prohibited from distributing the cell line directly derived from my sample, or

material directly isolated from it, in commercial products or services. However, scientists may use

information learned from studies on my sample to develop commercial products or services.

Benefits

There will be no direct benefit or payment to me for participating, but results from research done on my

sample may benefit the community at large or some particular group. It is possible that research done

on my sample(s) could someday contribute to a better understanding of disease, developing a diagnostic

test or finding a treatment or cure for a disease or new ways to prevent diseases.

Risks

The risks of drawing blood are minor transient pain and a slight possibility of infection. The risks of a skin biopsy are mild local pain, some bleeding, the possibility of a small scar, and a slight possibility of infection.

Although the NIGMS Repository takes many measures to protect my privacy, there can be no absolute

guarantee of confidentiality. There is a very small chance that information learned from my sample

about my DNA sequence could be used to identify my sample as having come from me. Should I decide

to allow extensive genetic data from my sample to be made publically available, the risk that I could be

identified from this data is very slightly higher than if this data could only be shared between

researchers.

There is a small chance that some research may yield results that might have a negative impact on me,

my family, other individuals, or groups.

Privacy

I understand that the NIGMS Repository will take measures to protect my privacy. My blood, skin biopsy

specimen, or cell line will be given a code number, and only the code number wil be used to track the

sample. The NIGMS Repository wil not give out my name to the scientists who receive samples. Some

personal health information, such as age at the time of col ection, gender, diagnosis, race, and ethnicity or country of origin will be made available to the NIGMS Repository and scientists.

The Coriell Institute for Medical Research, which operates the NIGMS Repository, has obtained a

Certificate of Confidentiality from the National Institutes of Health to help ensure my privacy. With this certificate, Coriell cannot be forced to disclose information that may identify me, even by a court

subpoena, in any federal, state, or local civil, criminal, administrative, legislative, or other proceedings.

NIGMS HGCR Informed Consent Form



Page 2 of 4

Form 1401-63 Rev E - 072015





Coriell will use the Certificate to resist any demands for information that would identify me, except as

explained below.

The Certificate cannot be used to resist a demand for information from personnel of the United States

Government that is used for auditing or evaluation of federally funded projects or for information that

must be disclosed in order to meet the requirements of the Federal Food and Drug Administration

(FDA).

I understand that a Certificate of Confidentiality does not prevent me or a member of my family from

voluntarily releasing information about me or my donation of a sample to the NIGMS Repository.

Participation

My participation is voluntary, and if I choose not to participate, there will be no penalty or loss of

benefits to which I am entitled.

Withdrawal

If I decide that I no longer wish to have my sample(s) in the NIGMS Repository, I may contact the NIGMS

Repository by e-mail (NIGMS@coriell.org) and request that my remaining undistributed sample(s) and

accompanying clinical information be withdrawn from the NIGMS Repository. However, it will not be

possible to destroy samples and information that have already been distributed to researchers, and it is

not possible to remove any mention of my sample(s) in publications.

Contact Information:

If I have any questions or complications relating to collection of this specimen, I should contact my

personal physician or the healthcare provider who collected the specimen.

Name: _________________________________________ Telephone: ___________________________



If I have any questions about the NIGMS Repository, I should contact the NIGMS Repository Principal

Investigator:

Dr. Nahid Turan

Coriell Institute for Medical Research

403 Haddon Avenue, Camden, New Jersey 08103

Phone: 856-757-4833

E-mail: nturan@coriell.org

If I have questions about my rights as a research subject, I should contact a member of the Coriell

Institutional Review Board (Telephone: 800-752-3805 or NIGMS@coriell.org).

Please complete the items on the fol owing page.



NIGMS HGCR Informed Consent Form



Page 3 of 4

Form 1401-63 Rev E - 072015





Complete the items below: ( Please print legibly)

Parents or legally authorized representatives MUST provide consent for minors (children under 17 years

old) and cognitively impaired subjects. If able, children aged 7 through 17 may sign the NIGMS

Repository Assent Form.

I agree to donate to the NIGMS Repository (check all that apply):



Peripheral whole blood (1-2 tubes: about 8-24 milliliters, or 1.5-5 teaspoons)

Skin biopsy (up to ¼ inch)

I agree to allow public access to extensive genetic data from my sample (check “Yes” or “No”):

Yes



No

I consent to the use of my sample(s) as described in this document. I have read the explanation about

the NIGMS Human Genetic Cel Repository and have been given the opportunity to discuss it and ask

questions.



Name of Donor



Signature (if minor, signature of parent or guardian)





Date

Relationship to Sample Donor:

SELF





PARENT/GUARDIAN Name of Parent/Guardian (if applicable)





Submitter





Submitters Address





NIGMS HGCR Informed Consent Form



Page 4 of 4

Form 1401-63 Rev E - 072015





