Legacy Emanuel Hospital

Patient
Informed
Consent

Legacy Good Samaritan Hospital

Full Name of Patient:

Print Form

Legacy Meridian Park Hospital
Legacy Mount Hood Medical Center
Legacy Salmon Creek Hospital

(Place patient identification label in this box.)

Name of Procedure(s):
I understand that the risks of transfusion are low, and include but are not limited to: infection (HIV, hepatitis,
other viruses), antibody development and immune reactions, contamination by bacteria, difficulty breathing
related to antibodies in the donor blood, temporary reduction in my natural immunity*.
I understand that there are alternatives to transfusion that include administration of hormones that stimulate
the bone marrrow (takes weeks to be effective), mineral supplementation (takes weeks to months to be
effective) collection of my own blood during surgery (for certain surgical patients only).
I understand the benefits of blood transfusion include improved oxygen delivery to vital organs (red blood cell
transfusions), improved blood clotting (plasma, platelets, cryoprecipitate).
The procedure(s), risks and alternatives listed above were explained to me. I have been instructed regarding the
risks, benefits, and side effects of the alternatives, including the possible results of not receiving care, treatment,
and services. I have had the opportunity to ask questions and all of my questions about the procedure(s), risks
and alternatives were answered to my satisfaction. I have been instructed regarding potential problems that
might occur during my recuperation and the likelihood of achieving goals.
* Please see brochure "Blood Transfusion Information for Patients", current edition, for more information
about transfusions, including statistics on infectious disease risks.

I CONSENT TO THE ABOVE PROCEDURE(S)
(Patients Signature**)

(Printed Name)

(Date and Time)

I therefore consent for patient

**Patient is unable to consent because
(Authorized Consenter's Signature)

(Witness' Signature)

(Printed Name)

Only required for telephone consent

(Relationship to Patient)

(Date and Time)

(Printed Name)

I EXPLAINED THE ABOVE PROCEDURE(S) TOTHE PATIENT OR AUTHORIZED CONSENTER
(Practitioner's Signature)

Rev.4/08

(Printed Name)

(Date and Time)

Place original form in chart. For procedures performed in Washington, provide a signed copy to the patient

Whenever possible, the patient should complete the consent process. In the event the patient is unable to
consent due to age or a physical or mental condition, the consent form must be signed by a person the law
recognizes as someone who may act for the patient.
The following individuals may sign the consent form:
Adult Patients:

Patients 18 years or older who are not suffering from a physical or mental condition
which prohibits them from understanding what they are doing.

Minor Patients:

In Oregon, patients under the age of 18 years of age if they are: (a) married,
(b) emancipated by court order or (c) 15 years of age or older and seeking hospital
care, or diagnosis or treatment by a physician or dentist licensed by the State of
Oregon. ORS 109.640. The physician or practitioner and the hospital are permitted
to notify the parent or guardian regarding the treatment without the consent of
the minor. ORS 109.650.
In Washington, patients under 18 years of age if they are (a) married to a person age
18 or older or (b) emancipated by court order.

Blood Transfusion Consents:
Valid for one year after signing - Inpatient / Outpatient

