MI

MARIJUANA DOCTORS

Medical Marijuana Consent Form

A qualified physician may not delegate the responsibility of obtaining written informed consent to
another person. The qualified patient or the patient’s parent or legal guardian if the patient is a minor
must initial each section of this consent form to indicate that the physician explained the information
and, along with the qualified physician, must sign and date the informed consent form.

a. The Federal Government’s classification of marijuana as a Schedule I controlled substance.

_The Federal Government has classified marijuana as a Schedule | controlled substance. Schedulel
substances are defined, in part, as having (1) a high potential for abuse; (2) no currently accepted
medical use in treatment in the United States; and (3) a lack of accepted safety for use under medical
supervision. Federal law prohibits the manufacture, distribution and possession of marijuana even in
states, such as Florida, which have modified their state laws to treat marijuana as a medicine.

When in the possession or under the influence of medical marijuana, the patient or the patient’s
caregiver must have his or her medical marijuana use registry identification card in his or her possession
at all times.

b. The approval and oversight status of marijuana by the Food and Drug Administration.

_Marijuana has not been approved by the Food and Drug Administration for marketing as a drug.
Therefore, the "manufacture” of marijuana for medical use is not subject to any federal standards,
quality control, or other oversight. Marijuana may contain unknown quantities of active ingredients,
which may vary in potency, impurities, contaminants, and substances in addition to THC, which is the
primary psychoactive chemical component of marijuana.

c. The potential for addiction.

_Some studies suggest that the use of marijuana by individuals may lead to a tolerance to,
dependence on, or addiction to marijuana. I understand that ifl require increasingly higher doses to
achieve the same benefit or ifl think that I may be developing a dependency on marijuana, I should
contact Dr. ______ (name of qualified physician).

d. The potential effect that marijuana may have on a patient’s coordination, motor skills, and
cognition, including a warning against operating heavy machinery, operating a motor vehicle,
or engaging in activities that require a person to be alert or respond quickly.

_The use of marijuana can affect coordination, motor skills and cognition, i.e., the ability to think,
judge and reason. Driving under the influence of cannabis can double the risk of crashing, which
escalates if alcohol is also influencing the driver. While using medical marijuana, I should not drive,
operate heavy machinery or engage in any activities that require me to be alert and/or respond quickly
and I should not participate in activities that may be dangerous to myself or others. I understand that if I
drive while under the influence of marijuana, I can be arrested for "driving under the influence.”

e. The potential side effects of medical marijuana use.

Potential side effects from the use of marijuana include, but are not limited to, the following:
dizziness, anxiety, confusion, sedation, low blood pressure, impairment of short term memory,

MI

MARIJUANA DOCTORS

euphoria, difficulty in completing complex tasks, suppression of the body’s immune system, may affect
the production of sex hormones that lead to adverse effects, inability to concentrate, impaired motor
skills, paranoia, psychotic symptoms, general apathy, depression and/or restlessness. Marijuana may
exacerbate schizophrenia in persons predisposed to that disorder. In addition, the use of medical
marijuana may cause me to talk or eat in excess, alter my perception of time and space and impair my
judgment. Many medical authorities claim that use of medical marijuana, especially by persons younger
than 25, can result in long-term problems with attention, memory, learning, drug abuse, and
schizophrenia.

|understand that using medical marijuana while consuming alcohol is not recommended.
Additional side effects may become present when using both alcohol and marijuana.

I agree to contact Dr. __ ifl experience any of the side effects listed above, or if
Ibecome depressed or psychotic, have suicidal thoughts, or experience crying spells. I will also contact
Dr. __ ___ ifl experience respiratory problems, changes in my normal sleeping patterns,

extreme fatigue, increased irritability, or begin to withdraw from my family and/or friends.
f. The risks, benefits, and drug interactions of marijuana.

Signs of withdrawal can include: feelings of depression, sadness, irritability, insomnia,
restlessness, agitation, loss of appetite, trouble concentrating, sleep disturbances and unusual tiredness.

_Symptoms of marijuana overdose include, but are not limited to, nausea, vomiting, hacking cough,
disturbances in heart rhythms, numbness in the hands, feet, arms or legs, anxiety attacks and
incapacitation. Ifl experience these symptoms, I agree to contact Dr. _ immediately
or go to the nearest emergency room.

Numerous drugs are known to interact with marijuana and not all drug interactions are known.
Some mixtures of medications can lead to serious and even fatal consequences. I agree to follow the
directions of Dr. regarding the use of prescription and non-prescription

medication. I will advise any other of my treating physician(s) of my use of medical marijuana.

Marijuana may increase the risk of bleeding, low blood pressure, elevated blood sugar, liver
enzymes, and other bodily systems when taken with herbs and supplements. I agree to contact
Dr. immediately or go to the nearest emergency room if these symptoms occur.

I understand that medical marijuana may have serious risks and may cause low birthweight or
other abnormalities in babies. I will advise Dr. if I become pregnant, try to get
pregnant, or will be breastfeeding.

g. The current state of research on the efficacy of marijuana to treat the qualifying conditions set
forth in this section.

Cancer

0 There is insufficient evidence to support or refute the conclusion that cannabinoids are an
effective treatment for cancers, including glioma.

There is evidence to suggest that cannabinoids (and the endocannabinoid system more
generally) may play a role in the cancer regulation processes. Due to a lack of recent,

MI

MARIJUANA DOCTORS

high quality reviews, a research gap exists concerning the effectiveness of cannabis or
cannabinoids in treating cancer in general.

0 There is conclusive evidence that oral cannabinoids are effective antiemetics in the treatment of
chemotherapy-included nausea and vomiting.

There is insufficient evidence to support or refute the conclusion that cannabinoids are
an effective treatment for cancer-associated anorexia-cachexia syndrome and anorexia
nervosa.

Epilepsy

0 There is insufficient evidence to support or refute the conclusion that cannabinoids are an
effective treatment for epilepsy.

Recent systematic reviews were unable to identify any randomized controlled trials for
evaluating the efficacy of cannabinoids for the treatment of epilepsy. Currently available
clinical data therefore consist solely of uncontrolled case series, which do not provide
high-quality evidence of efficacy. Randomized trials of the efficacy of cannabidiol for
different forms of epilepsy have been completed and await publication.

Glaucoma

0 There is limited evidence that cannabinoids are an ineffective treatment for improving
intraocular pressure associated with glaucoma.

Lower intraocular pressure is a key target for glaucoma treatments. Non-randomized
studies in healthy volunteers and glaucoma patients have shown short-term reductions
in intraocular pressure with oral, topical eye drops, and intravenous cannabinoids,
suggesting the potential for therapeutic benefit. A good-quality systemic review
identified a single small trial that found no effect of two cannabinoids, given as an
oromucosal spray, on intraocular pressure. The quality of evidence for the finding of no
effect is limited. However, to be effective, treatments targeting lower intraocular
pressure must provide continual rather than transient reductions in intraocular
pressure. To date, those studies showing positive effects have shown only short-term
benefit on intraocular pressure (hours), suggesting a limited potential for cannabinoids
in the treatment of glaucoma.

Positive status for human immunodeficiency virus.

0 There is limited evidence that cannabis and oral cannabinoids are effective in increasing
appetite and decreasing weight loss associated with HIV/AIDS.

There does not appear to be good-quality primary literature that reported on cannabis
or cannabinoids as effective treatments for AIDS wasting syndrome.

Acquired immune deficiency syndrome

0 There is limited evidence that cannabis and oral cannabinoids are effective in increasing
appetite and decreasing weight loss associated with HIV/AIDS.

MI

MARIJUANA DOCTORS

There does not appear to be good-quality primary literature that reported on cannabis
or cannabinoids as effective treatments for AIDS wasting syndrome.

Post-traumatic stress disorder

0 There is limited evidence (a single, small fair-quality trial) that nabilone is effective for improving
symptoms of posttraumatic stress disorder.

A single, small crossover trial suggests potential benefit from the pharmaceutical
cannabinoid nabilone. This limited evidence is most applicable to male veterans and
contrasts with non-randomized studies showing limited evidence of a statistical
association between cannabis use (plant derived forms) and increased severity of
posttraumatic stress disorder symptoms among individuals with posttraumatic stress
disorder. There are other trails that are in the process of being conducted and if
successfully completed, they will add substantially to the knowledge base.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis

0 There is insufficient evidence that cannabinoids are an effective treatment for symptoms
associated with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.

Two small studies investigated the effect of dronabinol on symptoms associated with
ALS. Although there were no differences from placebo in either trial, the sample sizes
were small, the duration of the studies was short, and the dose of dronabinol may have
been too small to ascertain any activity. The effect of cannabis was not investigated.

Crohn’s disease

0 There is insufficient evidence to support or refute the conclusion that dronabinol is an effective
treatment for the symptoms of irritable bowel syndrome.

Some studies suggest that marijuana in the form of cannabidiol may be beneficial in the
treatment of inflammatory bowel diseases, including Crohn’s disease.

Parkinson’s disease

0 There is insufficient evidence that cannabinoids are an effective treatment for the motor system
symptoms associated with Parkinson’s disease or the levodopa-induced dyskinesia.

Evidence suggests that the endocannabinoid system plays a meaningful role in certain
neurodegenerative processes; thus, it may be useful to determine the efficacy of
cannabinoids in treating the symptoms of neurodegenerative diseases. Small trials of
oral cannabinoid preparations have demonstrated no benefit compared to a placebo in
ameliorating the side effects of Parkinson’s disease. A seven-patient trial of nabilone
suggested that it improved the dyskinesia associated with levodopa therapy, but the
sample size limits the interpretation of the data. An observational study demonstrated
improved outcomes, but the lack of a control group and the small sample size are
limitations.

MI

MARIJUANA DOCTORS

Multiple sclerosis

0 There is substantial evidence that oral cannabinoids are an effective treatment for improving

patient-reported multiple sclerosis spasticity symptoms, but limited evidence for an effect on
clinical-measured spasticity.

Based on evidence from randomized controlled trials included in systematic reviews, an
oral cannabis extract, nabiximols, and orally administered THC are probably effective for
reducing patient-reported spasticity scores in patients with MS. The effect appears to be
modest. These agents have not consistently demonstrated a benefit on clinical-
measured spasticity indices.

Medical conditions of same kind or class as or comparable to the above qualifying medical
conditions

0 The qualifying physician has provided the patient or the patient’s caregiver a summary of the
current research on the efficacy or marijuana to treat the patient’s medical condition.
0 The summary is attached to this informed consent as Addendum

Terminal conditions diagnosed by a physician other than the qualified physician issuing the
physician certification

0 The qualifying physician has provided the patient or the patient’s caregiver a summary of the
current research on the efficacy of marijuana to treat the patient’s terminal condition.
0 The summary is attached to this informed consent as Addendum

Chronic nonmalignant pain

0 There is substantial evidence that cannabis is an effective treatment for chronic pain in adults.

The majority of studies on pain evaluated nabiximols outside the United States. Only a
handful of studies have evaluated the use of cannabis in the United States, and all of
them evaluated cannabis in flower form provided by the National Institute on Drug
Abuse. In contrast, many of the cannabis products that are sold in state-regulated
markets bear little resemblance to the products that are available for research at the
federal level in the United States. Pain patients also use topical forms.

While the use of cannabis for the treatment of pain is supported by well-controlled
clinical trials, very little is known about the efficacy, dose, routes of administration, or

side effects of commonly used and commercially available cannabis products in the
United States.

h. That the patient’s de-identified health information contained in the physician certification and
medical marijuana use registry may be used for research purposes.

The Department of Health submits a data set to The Medical Marijuana Research and Education
Coalition for each patient registered in the medical marijuana use registry that includes the patient’s
qualifying medical condition and the daily dose amount and forms of marijuana certified for the patient.

MI

MARIJUANA DOCTORS

_I have had the opportunity to discuss these matters with the physician and to ask questions
regarding anything I may not understand or that I believe needed to be clarified. I acknowledge that

Dr. has informed me of the nature of a recommended treatment, including but not
limited to, any recommendation regarding medical marijuana.

Dr. __ ___ also informed me of the risks, complications, and expected benefits ofany
recommended treatment, including its likelihood of success and failure. I acknowledge that
Dr. informed me of any alternatives to the recommended treatment, including the

alternative of no treatment, and the risks and benefits.

 

 

Dr. has explained the information in this consent form about the
medical use of marijuana.

 

Patient (print name)

 

Patient signature or signature of the parent or legal guardian if the patient is a minor:

Date_ _

 

I have explained the information in this consent form about the medical use of marijuana to
(Print patient name).

 

Qualified physician signature:

 

Witness:

 

 

 

