SCHEDULED DELIVERY:

 

 

 

Today’s Date: Date of scheduled delivery:

Physician: Type of Delivery Planned:

Patient Name: Age:
Phone: G/P: EDC: Gestational Age at time of induction:

Reasons for Scheduled Delivery: Circle appropriate diagnosis below

Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Elective

Gestational Hypertension Macrosomia (EFW greater than 40009ms) History of rapid labor
Preeclampsia Postdates (41 — 42 weeks) Distance from hospital
Eclampsia Gestational Diabetes Term w/ favorable cervix
Abruptio placenta IUGR — reassuring testing Psychological Factors
Bleeding D/T Marginal Placenta Previa Fetal demise AND

Non-Reassuring fetal testing History of HSV Gestational Age greater than
Maternal Medical Conditions or equal to 39 weeks

Fetal Compromise (IUGR)
Oligohydramnios

Postdates greater than 42 weeks
Blood group sensitization

Fetal Hydrops

Chorioamnionitis

PROM

Clinical Indications: (with supporting data)

 

 

 

I have discussed the need, risks and benefits with my patient. The patient has been advised as to the reasonable alternatives, possible
consequences of continuing pregnancy and risks and possible complications of each alternative.

Physician Printed Name Date

 

Physician Signature Date

 

Please fax to High Risk OB ~ Labor & Delivery ~ 614-293-5712

 

 

 

 

Name
DOB
MR #
The Ohio State University Medical Center FAN #
Induction Scheduling & Consent Form
Consent 09/08161’11

 

       

'oﬁid

Medical

Scheduled Delivery Form

   

Guidelines for Scheduling

Center

PurQose: To provide guidance in scheduling and prioritizing of inductions. Induction is deﬁned as the initiation of labor in a patient in
whom active labor has not been documented.

1 .

To schedule a delivem the physician lofﬁce staff will call Labor & Delivery (614-293-8497) for an induction date and time. The
physician must complete the Scheduling Form and fax it to L&D within 24 hours of the call.

 

2. Inductions may be scheduled up to 7 days prior to the patient’s planned admission. lfa physician desires to add on an
induction for the day, the physician must call the L&D charge nurse for a time. No patient will be denied an induction if
medically indicated.

3. When a request is received to schedule more than the allotted number of inductions on the same day, it will be necessary to
prioritize which patients need to be induced ﬁrst. Medical inductions will take priority over elective inductions. If more than on
patient is being induced for medical indications, the following list will be used to prioritize which patients need to be induced ﬁrst:

Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Elective

Gestational Hypertension Macrosomia (EFW greater than 40009ms) History of rapid labor

Preeclampsia Postdates (41 — 42 weeks) Distance from hospital

Eclampsia Gestational Diabetes Term w/ favorable cervix

Abruptio placenta IUGR — reassuring testing Psychological Factors

Bleeding D/T Marginal Placenta Previa Fetal demise AND

Non-Reassuring fetal testing History of HSV Gestational Age greater than Maternal

Medical Conditions or equal to 39 weeks

Fetal Compromise (IUGR)
Oligohydramnios

Postdates greater than 42 wee ks
Blood group sensitization

Fetal Hydrops

Chorioamnionitis

PROM

If it is necessary to delay an induction/section, the following steps will be taken:

a) The charge nurse will notify the resident of the delay and an approximate time for admission. The resident will discuss
this with the patient’s primary physician. The physician may approve a later start time for that day or elect to reschedule.

b) The patient will be notified by the resident or physician, as appropriate, of the delay.

c) Medically indicated induction will be given priority. Elective inductions will be delayed based upon the order in which they
were scheduled (last scheduled, first delayed).

d) Elective inductions may be rescheduled or delayed, based on unit census and stafﬁng.
lfa concern exists about the prioritization of patients to be induced, the physician may request the L&D/HROB Nurse Manager or

Assistant Nurse Manager review the Induction Consent and Scheduling Form completed for each patient scheduled to be
induced. In an attempt to resolve the issue the Nurse Manager may discuss with the provider involved or the Department Chair.

