 
PENN Medicine BioBank: 
Tissue 
 
UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA 
RESEARCH SUBJECT INFORMED CONSENT AND 
HIPAA AUTHORIZATION FORM 
 
Protocol Title: Penn Medicine BioBank: Tissue and/or Blood Collection 
Principal Michael D. Feldman, MD, PhD 
Investigator: University of Pennsylvania 
(215) 662-6503 
Secondary JoEllen Weaver 
Contact: University of Pennsylvania 
(215) 349-5027 
 
Researchers are trying to learn more about cancer, heart disease, diabetes, and other health 
problems. Much of this research is done using human tissue and blood. Through these studies, 
researchers hope to find new ways to detect, treat, and maybe prevent or cure health problems. 
Some of these studies may be about how genes affect health and disease, or how genes affect 
response to treatment. Some of them may lead to new products, such as drugs or tests for 
diseases. 
We are asking you to let us store some of your health information along with your tissue and/or 
blood to use in these kinds of studies. Tissue donated would be in excess of what is needed for 
your health care. Any adult who gets care at Penn Medicine may be asked to donate to this 
BioBank. We plan to collect samples on approximately 10,000 patients over the next 5 years. 
You can choose to take part in this storage project or not. This consent form gives information to 
help you decide. This form includes the HIPAA Authorization describing your confidentiality and 
privacy rights. Please read it carefully and take all the time you need to make your choice. Be 
sure to ask us as many questions as you want. Everyone who takes part in research should know 
that: 
• Taking part may involve some risks. 
• Taking part is voluntary. If you choose to take part, you can quit at any time. 
• No matter what you decide, now or in the future, it will not affect your medical care. 
WHAT IS THE PURPOSE OF THIS RESEARCH PROJECT? 
The purpose of the Penn Medicine BioBank is to collect and store tissue, blood, and health 
information so researchers can use them in future studies. 
Your donated sample may be used in a variety of research studies including basic medical, 
translational, clinical, and epidemiological research. 
Some of these studies will use your DNA. Human DNA is organized in pieces called genes that 
provide the instructions to make our bodies work. Common diseases may be caused by several 
genes that work together. Also, your sample may be used for the measurement of markers that 
associate with disease or development of diseases. Some researchers might study the link of 
DNA and other blood markers with clinical outcomes, including response to treatment. 
Other studies may involve creating cell lines from your donated sample. These cells will be 
similar or identical to you genetically. Cell lines may be kept for many years and may be used 
to develop treatments for a variety of diseases and conditions. 
 Version 1.2 – 7/22/13 Page 1 of 5 
IRB Approval From 3/19/15 to 3/18/16 
 
PENN Medicine BioBank: 
Tissue 
 
WHAT IS INVOLVED? 
Your participation will take approximately 15-20 minutes of your time. If you agree to take part, 
we will ask you to sign this form. We will give you a copy to keep. Here is what will happen next: 
1. If you consent to donate tissue, the tissue sample would be a portion of the tissue 
normally removed for your care.  During your time at UPHS, any time that tissue is 
removed as part of your care, the removed tissue may be examined in the Department 
of Pathology. The Department of Pathology will determine the amount of  tissue needed 
for your health care. If you consent, tissue in excess of this amount may be released to 
the BioBank. If you do not consent to donate this tissue, excess tissue will be destroyed. 
2. If you consent to donate blood, we will get a blood sample from you. We will collect up to 
3 tablespoons of blood from a vein in your arm. This blood collection may be done in 
combination with other clinical procedures, or an additional needle stick. 
3. W e will get some information about you and your health. 
• We will ask you to provide some identifying information, such as your name, date of 
birth, medical record number and contact information. 
• We will ask you for some additional information about you, such as your race, health 
history and family’s health conditions. 
• We will get some health information from your medical record, examples include test 
results, medical procedures, images (such as X-rays), and medicines you take. 
• We will use your medical record from time to time to update this information. 
4. W e will store your sample and information in the BioBank, along with those from all the 
other people who take part. There is no limit on the length of time we will keep it. Your 
sample and data may be kept until they are used up, or until the Penn Medicine BioBank 
decides to destroy them. 
5. W e will let researchers use the materials stored in the BioBank for approved studies. 
Researchers from Penn, other universities, the government, and drug- or health-related 
companies can apply to use the materials. A science committee at the BioBank will review 
each request. There will also be an ethics review. 
6. Some of your genetic and health information may be placed in scientific databases, 
along with that from many other people. Information that could directly identify you will 
never be included. Researchers who want to study the information must apply to the 
database. 
WHAT ARE THE POSSIBLE RISKS? 
Because the tissue being removed is part of your care, there is no additional risk to donating 
tissue. 
The most common risks related to drawing blood from your arm are brief pain and/or bruising. 
There is a risk that someone could get access to the data we have stored about you. In some 
cases, it could be used to make it harder for you to get or keep a job or insurance. There are laws 
against the misuse of genetic information, but they may not give full protection. W e believe the 
chance these things will happen is very small, but we cannot make guarantees. 
There is a risk that someone could trace the information in a scientific database back to you.  
Even without your name or other identifiers, your genetic information is unique to you. We believe 
the chance that someone will identify you is very small. But the risk may grow in the future if 
people come up with new ways of tracing information. 
 Version 1.2 – 7/22/13 Page 2 of 5 
IRB Approval From 3/19/15 to 3/18/16 
 
PENN Medicine BioBank: 
Tissue 
 
WHAT PROTECTED HEALTH INFORMATION DO RESEARCHERS WANT TO USE? 
The researchers may want to use portions of your health information that they will need for their 
research. If you enter the Penn Medicine BioBank, health information that may be used and/or 
released include the following: 
• Name 
• Medical record number 
• Dates such as date of birth, medical events, and follow-up 
• Address, telephone number 
• Tissue/blood/cells/DNA 
WHY IS MY PROTECTED HEALTH INFORMATION NEEDED? 
Your information is used by the research team to: 
• Do the research 
• Oversee the research 
• To see if the research was done right 
WHO WILL BE ABLE TO SEE MY PERSONAL HEALTH INFORMATION? 
Access to your personal health information for this research study will be restricted to the 
following individuals: 
• The Principle Investigator and the Investigator’s study team 
• Penn researchers with approval from the Penn Medicine BioBank Steering Committee and 
approval from the Institutional Review Board (IRB). 
• Authorized members of the workforce of the UPHS and the School of Medicine and the 
University of Pennsylvania support offices who may need to access your information in 
the performance of their duties (for example, for research oversight and monitoring). 
In addition to the individuals within the UPHS system outlined above, coded data may be shared 
with external partners at other academic or commercial research laboratories. These external 
partners may include the National Institutes of Health or other multi-institutional consortia. For 
external research, all direct identifiers will be removed; however, some indirect identifiers, such 
as dates of service, may be released. 
HOW WILL INFORMATION ABOUT ME BE KEPT PRIVATE? 
Your privacy is very important to us and we will make every effort to protect it. We will remove 
your name and other identifiers from your sample and information, and replace them with a code 
number. Only a few of the BioBank staff and approved Penn researchers will have access to the 
code. All people with access to the code must sign an agreement to keep your identity a secret. 
None of your personal identifiers will be shared outside of Penn. 
Information that is shared outside Penn may no longer be protected by the federal privacy law 
called HIPAA. But it will be protected as described in this form and may be covered by other 
privacy laws. 
HOW LONG DOES THE AUTHORIZATION LAST? 
Your authorization for use of your personal health information for this specific study does not 
expire. 
WHAT IF I DECIDE NOT TO GIVE PERMISSION TO USE AND GIVE OUT MY HEALTH 
INFORMATION? 
Then you will not be able to be in this research study. 
 Version 1.2 – 7/22/13 Page 3 of 5 
IRB Approval From 3/19/15 to 3/18/16 
 
PENN Medicine BioBank: 
Tissue 
 
WHAT ARE THE POSSIBLE BENEFITS? 
You will not get direct benefit from taking part. The main reason you may want to take part is to 
help researchers make discoveries that might help people in the future. 
ARE THERE ANY COSTS OR PAYMENTS? 
There are no costs to you or your insurance. You will not be paid for taking part. If any of the 
research leads to new tests, drugs, or other commercial products, you will not share in any 
profits. Your donation is a gift. 
WILL I FIND OUT THE RESULTS OF THE RESEARCH? 
You should not expect to get individual results from research done using your sample. If 
researchers determine that there is new information that should be shared with you, 
you will be notified. 
WHAT ARE MY OPTIONS? 
Taking part in the BioBank is your choice. You can choose to take part or not take part. If you 
choose to take part, you can change your mind at any time. 
WHAT IF I CHANGE MY MIND? 
Just call (215) 349-5027 and let us know. You may withdraw or take away your permission to use 
your health information, tissue, or blood sample at any time. When you contact us to withdraw 
permission, we will send you a form to complete so you can tell us in writing what you would like 
us to do with any of your sample that we have not already given out for study.  Your sample and 
personal data will no longer be used if you withdraw. However, researchers may still use any de- 
identified information or samples given to scientists before your request. 
WHAT IF I HAVE MORE QUESTIONS? 
For questions or concerns about this project, contact JoEllen W eaver, the BioBank Technical 
Director, at (215) 349-5027. For questions about your rights as a research participant, contact the 
University of Pennsylvania’s Office of Regulatory Affairs by calling (215) 898-2614. 
CONSENT STATEMENT 
The project staff has explained to me the purpose of the Penn Medicine BioBank, the procedures 
involved, and the risks and benefits. I have asked all the questions I have now, and I know who to 
contact if I have more questions. 
I voluntarily agree that my information and/or tissue and blood can be stored at the Penn 
Medicine BioBank. I understand it may be used in future research to learn about, prevent, or treat 
health problems. 
Tissue: If I give my permission to for the Penn Medicine BioBank to save a portion of tissue, I 
understand that this tissue will be taken out during my surgical procedure and is not needed for 
my health care. This will not limit the tissue needed for my health care. If I do not agree to have 
my tissue stored, the tissue will be thrown away. 
Blood: If I give permission to the BioBank to collect my blood, up to 35 ml (less than 3 
tablespoons) will be collected.  My blood may be drawn either at the time of other clinical blood 
collection or as a separate needle stick. 
By signing this document, I am permitting the Penn Medicine BioBank to use my personal health 
information. I understand that the BioBank will disclose health information about me for purposes 
as described above. 
 
 
 
Version 1.2 – 7/22/13 Page 4 of 5 
 IRB Approval From 3/19/15 to 3/18/16 
 
 
PENN Medicine BioBank: 
   Tissue  
  
In addition, I have made the optional choices marked below. I know that I can still take part in 
the Penn Medicine BioBank, even if I answer ‘no’ to any of these options. 
 
 
1. I give my permission for the BioBank to use a portion of tissue that is not needed for my 
health care. 
 
YES  NO   
(initials) (initials) 
 
 
2. I give my permission for the BioBank to collect a blood sample from me. 
 
YES  NO   
(initials) (initials) 
 
 
3. Someone from the BioBank can contact me up to once per year to update my personal 
information. 
 
YES  NO   
 (initials) (initials) 
 
 
4. Someone from the BioBank can contact me with offers to take part in other studies. 
 
YES  NO   
(initials) (initials) 
 
 
 
   
Name of Subject (Please Print) Signature of Subject Date 
 
 
 
   
Name of Person Obtaining Consent (Print) Signature Date 
 
 
 
 
 
For subjects unable to give authorization, the authorization is given by the following authorized 
subject representative: 
Authorized subject representative (Print) Signature Date 
Provide a brief description of above person’s authority to serve as the subject’s authorized 
 
representative.   
 
 
 
Version 1.2 – 7/22/13    Page 5 of 5  
 IRB Approval From 3/19/15 to 3/18/16 
