SEALANT CONSENT
Sealants are a plastic resin that is flowed into and bonded to the natural grooves that occur on the chewing surfaces
of the back primary and permanent teeth. This procedure helps prevent cavities from occurring in the pits and
fissures in the chewing surface of the back teeth.
I understand that the placement of sealants is intended to prevent dental cavities (tooth decay) in the pits and
fissures (grooves) of the chewing surfaces of the teeth. I understand that unsuccessful results and/or failure of dental
sealants involve, but are not limited to the following:
1. Loosening, dislodging or leaking: Sealants can become loose or dislodged over a period of time. This time is
indeterminable because of many variables including, but not limited to the following:
a. The forces of mastication (chewing). These forces differ from patient to patient.
b. The types of food or other substances that are eaten or chewed. Very sticky foods such as some
types of gum; sticky candies such as caramels; some licorices; very hard substances, etc.; may cause
loosening or dislodgment.
c. Inadequate oral hygiene such as infrequent or improper brushing of the teeth also may allow leakage around
and under the sealant causing it to loosen or allowing a cavity to develop underneath.
2. The entire tooth is not protected with sealants: Sealants are applied to the pits and fissures (grooves) that are
on the chewing surfaces of the teeth. Sealants do not protect the areas between the teeth, so thorough brushing
and the use of dental floss in these areas is still necessary.
3. Sealant repair: Routine examinations by the Dentist are recommended to allow ongoing assessment of the
sealants placed. This will allow the Dentist to repair any sealants as deemed necessary. As a service to our
patients, we will repair any of the sealants placed by our office for no additional fee, as long those patients
return for their 6-month check-up visits on a consistent basis.
I have been given the opportunity to ask questions regarding the nature and purpose of sealants and have received
answers to my satisfaction. I do voluntarily assume any and all possible risks, including the risk of substantial harm,
if any, which may be associated with sealant placement in hopes of achieving the desired results from the treatment
rendered. By signing this form, I am freely giving my consent to authorize the Dentist and/or all staff members
involved in placing sealants, including the administration and/or prescribing of any anesthetic agents and/or
medications.

Parent's Name:

Relationship to child

Child's Name:

Date:

Signature:

