I TEXAS Addendum to HPV (Human
Health and Human Texas Department of State Papillomavirus) Vaccine
" Services Health Services Vaccine Information Statement

 

I agree that the person named below Will get the vaccine checked below

I received or was offered a copy of the Vaccine Information Statement (VIS) for the vaccine listed above.

I know the risks of the disease this vaccine prevents.

I know the beneﬁts and risks of the vaccine.

I have had a chance to ask questions about the disease the vaccine prevents, the vaccine, and how the vaccine is given.

I know that the person named below Will have the vaccine put in his / her body to prevent the disease this vaccine prevents.

#99:“.0’5)!‘

I am an adult Who can legally consent for the person named below to get the vaccine. I freely and voluntarily give my
signed permission for this vaccine.

Vaccine to be given: El Human Papillomavirus (HPV) Vaccine

 

Information about person to receive vaccine (Please print)

Name: Last First Middle Initial Birthdate Sex
(mm/dd/yy) (circle one)

 

 

M F

 

 

 

Address: Street City County State Zip

TX

Signature of person to receive vaccine or person authorized to make the request @arent or guardian):

 

 

 

 

 

x Date:

x Date:
Witness

 

 

 

PRIVACY NOTIFICATION — With few exceptions, you have the right to request and be informed about information that
the State of Texas collects about you. You are entitled to receive and review the information upon re uest. You also have the
right to ask the state agency to correct any information that is determined to be incorrect. See httpz/ wwwdshstexasgov for
more information on Privacy Notiﬁcation. (Reference: Government Code, Section 552.021, 552.023, 559.003, and 559.004)

Privacy Notice: I acknowledge that I have received a copy of my immunization provider’s HIPAA Privacy Notice.

For Clinic / Ofﬁce Use Only

Clinic / Ofﬁce Address: Date Vaccine Administered:
Vaccine Manufacturer:
Vaccine Lot Number:

Site of In'ection:

Title of Vaccine Administrator:

ture of Vaccine Adminis trator:
Date VIS Given:

 

Notice: Alterations or changes to this publication is prohibited without the express written consent of the Texas Department
of State Health Services, Immunization Unit.

 

 

 

Instructions: File this consent statement in the patient’s chart.

 

Immunization Unit - -
C—116 (07/17) CDC VIS Rev1510n 12/02/2016

