Surgical Associates
30 Perimeter Park Drive
Suite 200
Atlanta, GA 30341
Phone: 800-987-6543
Fax: 770-736-5725
Website: www.surgicalassociates.com

 

 

Appendix - Appendectomy (Laparoscopic) (Appendectomy
(Laparoscopic))

 

The Procedure
| request John Smith to do the following procedure: Appendix - Appendectomy (Laparoscopic)
(Appendectomy (Laparoscopic))

Communication with my Doctor

John Smith has eXoIained the following information:
This procedure involves removing the appendix. Your surgeon will make several small
incisions in the skin on the abdomen. They will usually be overthe appendix.

Laparoscopic surgery is done using a scope and hollow tube(s) called ports. These
are inserted through small cuts in the abdomen. A scope is a thin, lighted instrument
with a camera attached. It lets the surgeon see inside the abdomen. The surgeon can
pass tools through the ports. Carbon dioxide gas is pumped into the abdomen. This
helps the surgeon see inside the abdomen. It also gives more room to work. Your
surgeon may not be able to complete the procedure using a scope. Ifthe surgery is
not done with a scope, it may be done through a larger out.

Your surgeon will check nearby structures. The attachments ofthe appendix to the
bowel and the abdomen will be carefully cut and sealed. The appendix will be
removed.

Your surgeon will close the cut with stitches, staples, strips of tape, or other ways. A
temporary drain may be placed. This will allow fluid to drain from the inside to the
outside ofthe abdomen.

0 Illness or medical condition:

Appendicitis. This is inflammation and infection ofthe appendix. The appendix is a
tube-Iike structure attached to the large intestine near where itjoins with the small
intestine. Appendicitis results in pain and infection in the abdomen.

0 Treatment o.tions :

* Antibiotic medicines to treat the infection.
* Removing the appendix through one larger incision (open procedure).
* You may choose not to have this procedure.

0 and possible risks ifl do not have the operation/procedure:

Informed Consent Form Page 1 0f 4 12/9/10

Appendix -Appendeotomy (Laparoscopic) (Appendectomy
(Laparoscopic))

 

If you choose not to have this procedure, your appendix may rupture. Infection may
spread. A ruptured appendix may cause death.

0 of the operation/procedure:

* Another source of your problem may be found during the procedure.

* Pain, numbness, swelling, weakness or scarring where tissue is cut.

* Scar(s). Scars may be painful. They may limit function or range of motion. They
also may not look the way you want them to.

* The gas used in laparoscopic procedures to inflate the abdomen can become
trapped in tissues. Gas in the bloodstream can dangerously affect blood flow and
heart function.

* The procedure may not cure or relieve your condition or symptoms. They may come
back and even worsen.

* You may need additional tests or treatment.

* Your doctor may not be able to complete the procedure using a scope or robotics.
Your doctor may have to make a bigger cut to do the procedure.

* Bleeding. You may need blood transfusions or othertreatments. This may be
discovered during the procedure, or later.

* Chest pain. Chest pressure.

* Embolism. An embolism is an object that moves through your body in your
bloodstream. It can be an air bubble, a blood clot, a piece of fat or other material. It
can block a blood vessel. This can lead to stroke, pulmonary embolism (blockage of
the main artery ofthe lung), or injury to organs or extremities.

* Infection.

* Rapid or irregular heartbeat.

* Bladder problems after surgery. You may need a tube to drain urine. You may need
other procedures.

* Breathing problems. You may need a breathing tube or othertreatment.

* Damage to the bladder or nearby structures. This may be discovered during the
procedure, or later. You may need a catheter or surgery.

* Urinary tract problems after procedure. This can include difficulty holding urine,
frequent urination, bleeding and pain. These may be temporary or permanent.

* Wound infection, poor healing or reopening. Blood or clear fluid can also collect at
the wound site(s).

* An abscess or build-up of pus may form. It may require drainage or additional
surgery.

* Bowel obstruction (blockage).

* Damage to the bowel or nearby structures, possibly requiring an ostomy. An ostomy
is an opening in the abdominal wall. It allows stoo| to drain into a bag. This damage
may be discovered during the procedure, or later.

* Damage to the intestines or nearby structures. This may be discovered during the
procedure, or later.

* Fistula. An abnormal connection between channels in your body. This can include
the rectum, bladder, urethra, prostate (in men) or vagina (in women).

* Incisional hernia. Weak scartissue may allow tissue to bulge through the cut.

* Leak of bowel contents at the procedure site.

* The instrument(s) placed in your abdomen can cause injuries to nearby structures.
The equipment used to control bleeding can cause burning injuries.

* Damage, blockage, or sudden closure of blood vessels which may become an
emergency.

* Death.

Informed Consent Form Page 2 0f 4 12/9/10
Appendix -Appendeotomy (Laparoscopic) (Appendectomy

(Laparoscopic))

In addition to the risks listed above, any health or disease factors that |/my child has that
could increase my risks has been explained.

ofthe operation/procedure:
This procedure removes the infected organ. This may relieve pain. It may help your

symptoms in the abdomen.

Site or location ofthe operation/procedure:

See description oftreatment/procedure.

Expectations — how to prepare for my operation:

Before your operation:

* If you have had anything to eat or drink close to the time of your surgery, please
notify your doctor.

* General anesthesia is usually given during this procedure. You should not drive or
make critical decisions for 24 hours afterthe procedure. You will need someone to
drive you home if you are released the same day. You should have a responsible
adult available to help you the rest ofthe day.

EXoectations — recover — including information on medication, nutrition, pain control,

return to activity and wound care:

Activity:

* Most patients will be required to stay overnight. Depending on what your doctor finds
during your surgery, you may need to stay in the hospital longer. Your doctorwill
discuss the length of your hospital stay with you.

* Do not lift anything over 15 pounds. Do not do strenuous physical activity until your
doctor allows, including lifting or straining.

* You can return to work or school when you feel well enough and are no longer
needing strong prescription pain medicines. Most patients can return to school or
work in three to seven days as long as no lifting or straining is involved.

Diet:
* Eat high-fiber foods to avoid straining during bowel movements. If you are on pain
medicine, your doctor may prescribe a stool softenerto aid this process as well.

Wound care:

* Your wound will be covered with a bandage, surgical glue, or a sterile dressing.
Leave the wound covered for 48 hours. Change the dressing if it gets wet.

* Do not soak in a bathtub until your wound cover is removed. Taking a shower is OK.
Avoid getting the bandage, or your wound, wet.

* If your wound is closed with strips of tape, leave them in place until they fall off.

* A small amount ofdrainage is normal. Ifthe drainage is red, has a bad odor, or
covers your entire dressing, call your surgeon.

Follow-up care:

* Call your surgeon to schedule your follow-up visit.

* You will recover faster if you get up and start walking within hours after your
operation.

* Observe your wound for any signs of infection.

* Take medication for pain as needed.

* Do not drive, operate machinery, or make any important business or legal decisions if
you are taking narcotic pain medication.

Informed Consent Form Page 3 0f 4 12/9/10

Appendix -Appendeotomy (Laparoscopic) (Appendectomy
(Laparoscopic))

Call your doctor if you:

* Are unable to urinate.

* Have a fever greaterthan 101.5 degrees Fahrenheit.

* Have increased pain or pain that will not go away.

* Have difficulty breathing.

* Vomit.

* Notice swelling, redness, bleeding, or drainage with a bad odor from your wound site.

Consent for Treatment

By signing below, Iagree that:
o I have read this form or it was read to me.

I understand the explanation of the benefits and possible risks.

I understand my other options and what would happen if I have no treatment.

I was able to ask questions and they have been answered to my satisfaction.

I was given the opportunity to have a support person/interpreter present

I choose to have this procedure/operation done and authorize John Smith to complete

the procedure and his/her designated associates to assist with the operation.

I consent to any other emergency procedure required to treat a life-threatening event

during the operation.

0 Iconsent to the disposal of any tissues or parts that may be removed during the
procedure.

0 I understand that no guarantee has been made that the procedure/operation will improve
the condition.

00000

0

12/9/10
Signature of patient or person authorized to (Relationship to patient) Date
give consent

12/9/10
Witness to Patient signature Date

I believe that the patient/substitute decision-maker fully understood the review ofthe operation.

12/9/10
Signature of physician Date

Informed Consent Form Page 4 0f 4 12/9/10

Appendix -Appendeotomy (Laparoscopic) (Appendectomy
(Laparoscopic))

 

Medical Record Note

Su rgical Associates
30 Perimeter Park Drive
Suite 200
Atlanta, GA 30341

 

Date: 12/9/10 Time: Patient present: El Yes El No

Patient‘s representative (if applicable):

 

Planned procedure/treatment: Appendix - Appendectomy (Laparoscopic) (Appendectomy
(Laparoscopic))

Anatomical location/surgical site: See description oftreatment/procedure.

On the above date and time John Smith discussed with the patient/patient‘s representative all
relevant aspects of the procedure/operation, including indications, benefits, risks, and
alternatives including no treatment were discussed in language that he/she could understand.
The patient (or the patient‘s representative) indicated understanding of the discussion.

The patient (or the patient‘s representative) was given an opportunity to ask questions and
those questions were satisfactorily answered.

I have given the patient (or the patient‘s representative) the opportunity to review/receive a
printed copy of the consent form.

Other relevant notes from the informed consent discussion:

 

 

I have reviewed and approved this note.

Note prepared by: John Smith

Medical Record Note Page 1 of1 1219/10

 

Pre-Procedure Instructions

 

Appendix - Appendectomy (Laparoscopic) (Appendectomy
(Laparoscopic))

 

 

Please be aware of the following, prior to your procedure/operation:

Before your operation:

* If you have had anything to eat or drink close to the time of your surgery, please notify your
doctor.

* General anesthesia is usually given during this procedure. You should not drive or make
critical decisions for 24 hours after the procedure. You will need someone to drive you
home if you are released the same day. You should have a responsible adult available to
help you the rest of the day.

Other important things you need to do to prepare for your procedure/operation:

 

 

 

If you have any questions or concerns please contact our office:
Phone: 800-987-6543
Email: jsmith@surgicalassociates.com
Website (if applicable): www.surgicalassociates.com
Your surgeon: John Smith

For More Information
For more information on your procedure/operation, ask your surgeon or contact the following
organizations:

The American College of Surgeons
633 North Saint Clair Street

Chicago, IL 60611-3211

Patient Phone: 1-800-621-4111

Fax: 312-202-5029
http://www.facs.org/patienteducation/

National Institutes of Health

9000 Rockville Pike

Bethesda, Maryland 20892

Phone: Please see the NIH Toll-Free Information Lines and Toll-Free Health Hotlines on the
main page ofthe NIH Health Information Website — see link below.

http://hea|th.nih.gov/

Patient Instructions — Pre-Procedure Instructions Page 1 0f1 12/9/10

Appendix -Appendeotomy (Laparoscopic) (Appendectomy
(Laparoscopic))

Post—Procedure Instructions

 

 

Appendix - Appendectomy (Laparoscopic) (Appendectomy
(Laparoscopic))

 

Please be aware of the following after your procedure/operation:

Activity:

* Most patients will be required to stay overnight. Depending on what your doctor finds
during your surgery, you may need to stay in the hospital longer. Your doctor will discuss
the length of your hospital stay with you.

* Do not lift anything over 15 pounds. Do not do strenuous physical activity until your doctor
allows, including lifting or straining.

* You can return to work or school when you feel well enough and are no longer needing
strong prescription pain medicines. Most patients can return to school or work in three to
seven days as long as no lifting or straining is involved.

Diet:
* Eat high-fiber foods to avoid straining during bowel movements. If you are on pain
medicine, your doctor may prescribe a stool softener to aid this process as well.

Wound care:

* Your wound will be covered with a bandage, surgical glue, or a sterile dressing. Leave the
wound covered for 48 hours. Change the dressing if it gets wet.

* Do not soak in a bathtub until your wound cover is removed. Taking a shower is OK.
Avoid getting the bandage, or yourwound, wet.

* If your wound is closed with strips of tape, leave them in place until they fall off.

* A small amount of drainage is normal. If the drainage is red, has a bad odor, or covers
your entire dressing, call your surgeon.

Follow-up care:

* Call your surgeon to schedule your follow-up visit.

* You will recover faster if you get up and start walking within hours after your operation.

* Observe your wound for any signs of infection.

* Take medication for pain as needed.

* Do not drive, operate machinery, or make any important business or legal decisions if you
are taking narcotic pain medication.

Call your doctor if you:

* Are unable to urinate.

* Have a fever greater than 101.5 degrees Fahrenheit.

* Have increased pain or pain that will not go away.

* Have difficulty breathing.

* Vomit.

* Notice swelling, redness, bleeding, or drainage with a bad odor from yourwound site.

Other important things you need to do to after your procedure/operation:

 

 

Surgical Safety Checklist (World Health Organization — First Edition) Page 1 of 2

 

 

If you have any questions or concerns please contact our office:
Phone: 800-987-6543
Email: jsmith@surgicalassociates.com
Website (if applicable): www.surgicalassociates.com
Your surgeon: John Smith

For More Information

For more information on your procedure/operation, ask your surgeon or contact the following
organizations:

The American College of Surgeons
633 North Saint Clair Street

Chicago, IL 60611-3211

Patient Phone: 1-800-621-4111

Fax: 312-202-5029
http://www.facs.org/patienteducation/

National Institutes of Health

9000 Rockville Pike

Bethesda, Maryland 20892

Phone: Please see the NIH Toll-Free Information Lines and Toll-Free Health Hotlines on the
main page ofthe NIH Heath Information Website — see link below.

http://hea|th.nih.gov/

Surgical Safety Checklist (World Health Organization — First Edition) Page 2 of 2

