DATE:

AM. / P.M.

 

THE VALLEY HOSPITAL
Ridgewood, New Jersey

CONSENT TO OBSTETRICAL DELIVERY

1.

IC-42 MRec

Authorization. Ihereby authorize Dr. ("my Doctor") and any such
assistants or designees as may be selected by him/her to perform on
the following procedure(s):

 

(Name of Patient)

Technical name of procedure(s): Labor with vaginal Delivery -OR- Labor with Cesarean Section —OR-

Scheduled Cesarean Section

Description of procedure(s) in lay terms: 1) Your care during Labor and during the Vaginal Birth of your

baby. Care may include any or all of the procedures described on the attached Patient Information Sheet on

Labor and Delivery.

2) Deliverv bV Cesarean Section the care includes your care during Labor if appropriate and Delivery of
V our baby under anesthesia through an incision in the abdomen and the uterus.

Informed Consent. I have discussed my delivery with my doctor and have read and received the Patient
Information Sheet on Labor and Delivery. The nature and intended purpose of the procedure(s); the benefits
of the procedure(s); the significant risks and complications of the procedure(s); the possible or likely results
of the procedure(s); the feasible alternatives to the procedure(s); and the prognosis if no treatment whatsoever
is received, have been explained to and discussed with me.

Acknowledgement. I understand the practice of medicine and surgery is not an exact science, and that the
procedure(s) may not have the benefit or results intended. I have been informed and understand that not every
complication of childbirth and anesthesia administration canbe foreseen. Indeed, I understand that even if the
management of the pregnancy and/or labor and delivery and the anesthesia administration has been entirely
appropriate, there may occur unavoidable complications, sometimes with serious consequences, to the mother
and/or child. I acknowledge that no guarantees or assurances have been made to me concerning the results of
the procedure(s).

Additional Procedures. I understand that during the course of the procedure(s), unforeseen conditions may
arise that require additional or different procedure(s) other than those set forth in Paragraph 1. I authorize and
request that my Doctor, his/her assistants or designees perform such procedures as are necessary and desirable
in the exercise of their professional judgment. The authority granted under this paragraph shall extend to
treating all conditions that are not known to me at the time the procedure(s) is undertaken.

Blood Transfusions. Please complete Section A g B
A. D NOT APPLICABLE

B. I understand that it is or may be necessary for transfusion(s) of blood and/or blood products to be given
in connection with the procedure(s). I have received and have read the Patient Information Sheet on
Blood Transfusions.

(i) I will accept Blood/Blood Products: D Yes D No (If no is checked, offer registration in the Blood
Alternative Program)

Consent Includes’

Pt Info Sheet , Labor & Delivery - given to patient not part of permanent record
Pt Info Sheet , Transfusions , given to patient not part of permanent record

Pt Info Sheet , Anesthesia - given to patient not part of permanent record

Pt Info Sheet , Conscious Sedation - given to patient not part of permanent record

Page 1 of7
04/02, 04/03, 02/04, 02/06

(ii) In connection with my consent to transfusion(s) of blood, my Doctor has provided me with information
about, and has discussed and explained the following:

(a) The reason(s) for transfusion(s), a description of the transfusion(s), the benefits and significant risks of
the transfusion(s), all alternatives including autologous, homologous and directed donation, as well as the
risks and consequences of not receiving a transfusion(s).

(b) That a blood transfusion is not always successful and that no guarantee or assurance has been made to me
or anyone concerning the results of a transfusion, and that I may be subject to ill effects as a result of
receiving blood and/or blood products.

(0) That this consent applies to all transfusions I may receive during this hospitalization.

Anesthesia. I have received and have read the PatientInformation Sheet on Anesthesia and I consent to the
administration and management of such anesthesia as the anesthesiologist assigned to my procedure(s) deems
appropriate. I have also received and have read the Patient Information Sheet 011 Conscious Sedation and I
understand that conscious sedation may be administered by a doctor other than an anesthesiologist, or by a
nurse under the direction of a doctor, and I consent to the administration and management of such conscious
sedation as the doctor deems appropriate. I have been informed of the risks most commonly associated with
the administration of anesthesia and conscious sedation. I am aware that complications from all forms of
anesthesia and conscious sedation are rare, but may occur.

Specimen. I further consent to the examination and disposal of any specimen(s) removed in the performance
of the procedure(s), as well as for the use of any specimen(s) for the advancement of medical science and
education at the Hospital or any other institution the Hospital may designate.

Disposal of Umbilical Cord and Placenta. I consent to the hospital's disposal of the umbilical cord and
placenta, as it sees ﬁt.

Certification. By my signature below, I certify the following to be true:
A. I have read and fully understand the information in this consent form.
B. The information referred to in this consent form was explained to me.

C. I have had enough time to discuss my condition and the procedure(s), including blood transfusions and
anesthesia, with my Doctor, his/her associate or designee.

D. All of my questions have been answered to my satisfaction.

E. I believe I know enough about the procedure(s), blood transfusions and anesthesia, and do hereby give my
consent for surgery or special procedures.

 

 

(Signature of Patient) (Witness to Signature(s))

 

The above Procedures Have Been Fully Explained to
the Concerned Parties (Signature(s) of Physician(s))

IC-42 MRec

Consent Includes’

Pt Info Sheet , Labor & Delivery - given to patient not part of permanent record
Pt Info Sheet , Transfusions , given to patient not part of permanent record

Pt Info Sheet , Anesthesia - given to patient not part of permanent record

Pt Info Sheet , Conscious Sedation - given to patient not part of permanent record

Page 2 of 7
04/02, 04/03, 02/04, 02/06

IC-42 MRec

THE VALLEY HOSPITAL
Ridgewood, New Jersey

Patient Information Sheet on Labor and Delivery

INTRAVENOUS-SOLUTIONS-used to maintain hydration during labor, as well as to provide access
for various medications, blood or blood products, if needed. The most common complications associated
with their induction include pain and bruising (hematoma) at the site, and, less frequently, phlebitis. You
have the option of receiving a designated autologous blood transfusion or a homologous blood
transfusion, if you have made arrangements in advance.

FETAL MONITORING-used to maintain surveillance of the fetal heart rate and maternal contractions.

(a) External Monitoring-involves the placement of elasticized belts and measuring devices on the
mother's abdomen. There are no known risks to this procedure.

(b) Internal Monitoring—involves attachment of a small wire electrode to the presenting part of the fetus,
in most cases, to the head, to obtain the most accurate reading of the fetal heart rate. The most
common complications of this procedure include a small mark on the site of the electrode and/or
superficial infection at the puncture site.

(c) Internal Maternal Contraction Monitoring-used to monitor the intensity, strength and duration of
contractions by inserting a narrow plastic ﬂuid-filled tube, through the vagina, into the uterus and
attaching it to the maternal monitor. The risks of this procedure, although unlikely to occur, include
perforation of the uterus and infection.

AMNIOTOMY-rupture of the bag of waters to induce or expedite labor, to provide access to the fetus
for internal monitoring and to assess the nature of the amniotic ﬂuid. The procedure is accomplished by
inserting a small, blunt plastic instmment inserted through the vagina and cervix to puncture the amniotic
sac. The most common complication includes superficial scratches/abrasions to the presenting part of the
baby. The rare complication includes a prolapsed umbilical cord.

VAGINAL DELIVERY-is the delivery of a child through the vaginal canal.

EPISIOTOMY-an incision made in the perineum, the area between the vagina and the rectum, at the end
of the second stage of labor to avoid tearing of the perineum and to facilitate delivery of the baby. The
incision is repaired after the delivery using absorbable suture material. The more common complications
of an episiotomy include scarring or improper healing of the perineum. The rare complications include
painful intercourse, abnormal communication with the rectum and bladder or formation of a blood
collection (hematoma) which may require an additional procedure to evacuate or drain it.

DRUGS/MEDICATIONS:

(a) Pitocin-used to cause, increase or maintain contractions of the uterus to facilitate labor. This drug is
administered intravenously Via a solution through an electronic infusion pump. The risks of this
medication are over-stimulating of the uterus causing prolonged uterine contractions which in rare
circumstances may cause fetal distress and rarely may cause mpture of the uterus, which may result in
excessive bleeding.

Page 3 of 7
04/02 02/06

10.

11.

12.

IC-42 MRec

(b) Local Anesthetic Agents-are inj ected in the skin of the region of the episiotomy to provide anesthetic
for the episiotomy or the repair.

(c)Other Narcotics & Barbiturates-used during early labor to decrease the pain and anxiety associated
with labor. The complications may include pain at the injection site, low blood pressure and
depression or drowsiness of the baby if it is delivered soon after administration of the medication.

AMNIOINFUSION-used to replace ﬂuids into the uterus for the treatment of certain fetal heart patterns
and/or meconium stained amniotic ﬂuid. The ﬂuid is replaced through an Internal Maternal Contraction
monitor.

FETAL SCALP SAMPLING-used to obtain a blood specimen from the fetus to determine the fetal pH,
which is a measurement of fetal well-being. The sample is obtained by inserting an instmment through
the mothers' vagina, making a small puncture in the fetal scalp and withdrawing a small amount of blood
through a narrow tube. The most common complications include bleeding and superﬁcial infection at the
site of the puncture.

INDUCTION 0F LABOR-use of techniques and/or medicines that cause the cervix to thin (efface) and
dilate and stimulate labor when delivery of the fetus is indicated for medical and/or obstetrical reasons.
One common example is the use of prostaglandins in the vagina to soften the cervix.

FORCEPS DELIVERY-used to facilitate delivery in the case of prolonged labor or fetal distress. The
most common complication of forceps delivery is a mark on the baby which is usually temporary.
Occasionally, abnormal maternal bleeding (hemorrhage), vaginal lacerations which may require blood
transfusions and extensive vaginal repair, and formation of a blood collection (hematoma), may occur.

VACUUM EXTRACTION-a device, using a suction cup attached to the fetal head, for facilitating
delivery. The most common risks associated with this procedure include swelling, a superficial mark or a
bruise (hematoma) on the baby's scalp.

CESAREAN SECTION-removal of the fetus, under anesthesia, by means of an incision into the uterus
in circumstances where vaginal delivery is not possible. The most common complications include the
possibility of abnormal bleeding (hemorrhage), formation of scar tissue, and the possibility of future
cesarean section deliveries. Rarely, a complication may jeopardize the life of the mother. There is no
medically acceptable alternative to a recommended Cesarean Section. An attempted vaginal birth may
jeopardize the lift of the mother or the child.

Page 4 of 7
04/02 02/06

THE VALLEY HOSPITAL
Ridgewood, New Jersey

PATIENT INFORMATION SHEET
BLOOD TRANSFUSIONS

During the course of your medical treatment it may become necessary for you to have a transfusion of
blood or a transfusion of a component of blood. Transfusions can be homologous (blood that comes
from the community blood bank), directed (donations from relatives or friends) or autologous (donations
that come directly from you).

Autologous (self—donated) blood has the least risk of all. Directed donations are not recognized as being
any safer than ordinary bank blood donations.

Autologous blood must be donated in advance of elective surgery. Directed donations also require
advance notice. These options should be discussed with your Doctor.

All community blood bank products are obtained from volunteer sources who do not receive any
payment for their blood. Before giving blood, each donor is screened. If relevant health problems are
discovered, the donor is not accepted. The blood from each donor undergoes testing, including tests for
AIDS (HIV), hepatitis, and syphilis. The medical community feels that our modern knowledge and
technology have made transfusions safer today than they have ever been in the past.

There are risks from transfusions, but risks of serious or fatal complications are very rare. For instance,
the risk of acquiring the AIDS Virus through a transfusion is much less than it was several years ago
because of the available screening tests. The incidence of acquiring AIDS today through a transfusion
has been estimated at 1:2,000,0001 which is probably much less than one's chances of being a fatality in
a motor vehicle accident. Other risks include hepatitis, fever, hemolysis (a breakdown of red blood cells
due to an immune reaction which may cause anemia and kidney injury), and heart failure due to an
excessive amount of ﬂuids.

Transfusion risks must be weighed against beneﬁts, and criteria have been established to aid your Doctor
in making a decision about whether or not to transfuse.

In summary, the safest transfusion is autologous (self—donated), but autologous transfusions require the
luxury of advance notice, and are usually suited only to elective surgery. While directed and community
transfusions have more risk, the medical community is trying to make them safer than they have ever
been before. Your Doctor must make the decision to transfuse or not, based on medical science and
judgment.

If you or your Doctor decide to utilize autologous and/or directed blood, please call the Bergen
Community Blood Center for further information at (201) 444-3900.

IC-2 MRec Page 5 of7
07/96,03/01,01/02,01/06

 

1Reference: AABB Technical Manual, 15th Edition, 2005.

THE VALLEY HOSPITAL
Ridgewood, New Jersey

PATIENT INFORMATION SHEET
ON ANESTHESIA

The purpose of surgical anesthesia is to relieve pain during surgery through the use of various medications or
drugs known as anesthetic agents. Along with the delivery of the anesthetic agent, life support measures are
often undertaken in order to maintain the well-being of the patient. These measures might include the
administration of blood or blood products (unless such blood or blood products have been refused); use of
medications and equipment to support the heart, lungs or other systems of the body; antibiotics (drugs used to
prevent or treat infection); and medications to counteract disease states or correct imbalances.

Surgical anesthesia may be general, regional or local with intravenous conscious sedation. The type of
anesthesia selected in a given case will depend on the medical condition of the patient, the nature of the
procedure to be performed, and the preferences of the patient and of the surgeon.

General anesthesia is a method of surgical anesthesia in which the patient is rendered unconscious and
insensitive to pain (will be asleep) through the use of anesthetic agents administered by inhalation (breathing an
anesthetic gas through a mask) and/or by intravenous injection (using a small tube (catheter) to place the
anesthetic agent into a vein and, thus, into the patient's bloodstream). The anesthetic agent, the route of
administration, the dosage, and the depth of general anesthesia are dependent on the nature of the surgery to be
performed, the medical condition of the patient, and other considerations. Endotracheal intubation, in which a
breathing tube is placed into the windpipe, is often necessary. Occasionally, patients complain of a sore throat,
nausea and/or vomiting after undergoing general anesthesia. Strokes, brain damage and heart attack are rare
complications of general anesthesia.

Regional anesthesia is a method of surgical anesthesia in which anesthetic agents are used to numb a group of
sensory nerve fibers in order to make an area of the body insensitive to pain. Sometimes a tourniquet is used on
an arm or le g and an anesthetic agent is injected into a vein of that arm or 1e g. During this type of anesthesia a
sedative to relax and calm the patient during the surgery is used. Occasionally, for technical reasons, it is not
possible to produce this type of anesthesia or it is not completely satisfactory. When this occurs another type of
anesthesia, usually a general anesthetic, is added. Two of the commonly used types of regional anesthesia are
epidural and spinal anesthesia.

Local anesthesia with intravenous sedation is where a local anesthetic agent is injected into the site to be
operated on by the surgeon to block sensory nerves. This makes that area of the body insensitive to pain or
numb. During this type of anesthesia, a sedative to relax and calm the patient is often given intravenously.

In epidural anesthesia an anesthetic agent is injected into the epidural space to anesthetize (numb) the legs,
pelvis, abdomen, or other area of the body. With this type of anesthesia a small tube (catheter) is inserted into
the epidural space so that additional anesthetic agent can be injected as needed. Rare complications of epidural
anesthesia include infection and paralysis.

In spinal anesthesia the lower part of the body is made insensitive to pain by inj ecting an anesthetic agent into
the ﬂuid which bathes the spinal cord. Infrequently, a post-spinal headache may occur. Rare complications of
spinal anesthesia include infection and paralysis.

On the day of surgery, your anesthesiologist will speak with you to answer any questions you may have. Ifyou
wish to speak with an anesthesiologist prior to this, please call the Anesthesiology Department at (201) 447 -
8700.

IC-2 MRec Page 6 of7
07/96,]0/98, 01/02

THE VALLEY HOSPITAL
Ridgewood, New Jersey

PATIENT INFORMATION SHEET ON
CONSCIOUS SEDATION

This patient information sheet has been developed to explain conscious sedation.

Conscious sedation is a controlled state of extreme relaxation often resulting in little memory of the
procedure. This type of sedation reduces pain and awareness of the procedure while allowing the patient
to breathe on his/her own and to respond to verbal commands and/or gentle stimulation. Many times a
patient will not even recall having spoken to the staff during the procedure. Conscious sedation allows a
patient to tolerate the procedure by relieving anxiety, discomfort and/or pain. For procedures that
require children not to move conscious sedation will help them to remain still.

Informed consent must be obtained before the procedure and before the patient receives conscious
sedation. In children, the informed consent must be obtained from a parent or guardian of the child
before conscious sedation is administered. A physician or a nurse may administer conscious sedation.
The patient is monitored before, during and after the procedure.

If the patient is going home, arrangements should be made for a responsible adult to take the patient
home.

There are some risks with conscious sedation. The risk is dependent upon many factors including the
type of procedure and the medical condition of the patient. Fortunately, adverse events are rare.

IC-2 MRec Page 7 of 7
MB-4/99 01/02

