Genetic Testing Informed Consent
A. I am interested in obtaining a genetic test, by submitting a biological sample of my own blood, tissue
or other body fluids. I may be pregnant at the time of this genetic test or I may not be pregnant.
I understand that the genetic test is for:
Check appropriate test
disorders tested)

□Cystic Fibrosis □ HealthCheck | NB (see Exhibit A for complete list of

OR
B. I am the parent or legal guardian of the person who is interested in obtaining a genetic test, by
submitting a biological sample of that person’s blood, tissue or other body fluids. The person for whom
the sample is submitted may be pregnant at the time of this genetic test or may not be pregnant. In the
event that I am completing this form for a person other than myself, I understand that the terms “I”, “me”,
“my” and “mine”, as used below, refer to the person for whom the test will be performed.
I understand that the genetic test is for:
Check appropriate test
disorders tested)

□Cystic Fibrosis □ HealthCheck | NB (see Exhibit A for complete list of

1. The genetic test is being performed to identify whether or not I may be predisposed to contract this
disease and/or whether I have this disease or condition.
2. This test may also identify whether I may be a carrier for this disease or condition so that any
biological child of mine may be predisposed to contract this disease or have this disease or condition.
3. While results obtained from this type of genetic test are highly accurate, errors such as false positives
or false negatives may occur. I understand that this test in no way guarantees my health or the health of
my biological child.
4. I understand that genetic testing is a complex subject and that I may wish to obtain professional
genetic counseling concerning the risks and benefits of such testing, either before or after genetic testing.
My physician has provided me with written information identifying a genetic counselor or medical
geneticist from whom I may obtain such counseling. By my signature on this informed consent, I confirm
that I have had an opportunity to obtain professional genetic counseling prior to signing this informed
consent.
5. It is difficult to be certain that a positive test result for any particular disease or condition will serve as a
predictor of such disease or condition. I understand that I must confer with my physician, following my
physician’s receipt of any genetic test result, to determine the predictive value of the test result and the
advisability of further tests and/or genetic counseling.
6. In the event that my genetic test results are positive for this disease or condition, I understand that I
may wish to consider the following:
A. further independent testing
B. consultation with my physician or other specialist physician(s)
C. initial genetic counseling or further genetic counseling
7. I understand that, unless I direct otherwise, I will receive the results of the genetic test(s) performed.
A. In the case of HealthCheck | NB, these results will be returned directly to my pediatrician.
8. My test results may be disclosed to the following persons or organizations:
A. Ordering physician
B. Other physicians and/or genetic counselors to whom the ordering physician has requested that test
results be provided
C. Please note any other individuals or organizations who may receive genetic test results. A biological
mother must specifically authorize adoptive parents to obtain genetic test results for the biological
mother’s sample.

Genetic Testing Informed Consent

Page 1

9. I specifically authorize genetic test results be provided to my health insurer or health maintenance
organization to the extent that they are reasonably required for purposes of claims administration.
Further distribution within the insurer or to other recipients shall require my informed consent in each
case.
10. I understand that my state may permit certain other persons or organizations that are not listed above
access to my test results and that it is my right to delay testing until I have ascertained the laws of my
state in this regard.
11. I understand that the results of this test may become part of my permanent medical record and that
the results may be material to my ability to obtain certain insurance benefits.
12. I understand that no genetic tests other than those that I have authorized shall be performed on my
biological sample and that the sample will be destroyed at the end of the testing process or not more than
sixty days after the sample was taken. In the event that this sample is intended to be used for other nongenetic tests, that portion of the sample that is to be used for such tests may be retained for any
necessary period of time that is required in connection with such non-genetic tests.
13. I understand that my biological sample may be disclosed or retained for use in anonymous research
or coded research unless I request that my biological sample not be used for such research.
14. All records, findings and results of any genetic test performed on my biological sample will be treated
as confidential and, except as authorized by me or by law, will not be disclosed without my written
informed consent.
15. I represent that I am authorized to provide this consent on my own behalf. If the patient who has
submitted the biological sample lacks the capacity to consent, I represent that I have the authority to
provide informed consent on the part of such patient.
I have read and understand this consent form. I give my consent for genetic testing on the biological
sample.
Signature:
(Self)
Date:
Print Name:

If signing on behalf of a patient who lacks capacity:
Signature:
Date:
Print Name:
Relationship to Person:
DO NOT RETURN THIS CONSENT FORM TO NTD LABS, ViaCord or PerkinElmer Genetics. This
consent form is provided as a convenience for the ordering physician. It is the physician’s responsibility
to obtain the proper form of consent from the patient or the person who is authorized to act for the patient
when the patient lacks capacity. Please note that Nebraska has a model form of informed consent for
genetic testing.

Genetic Testing Informed Consent

Page 2

Exhibit A
HealthCheck | NB

Genetic Testing Informed Consent

Page 3

