(?Pulaski County
Public Schools

Reach Each Child

 

Dear Parents/ Guardians:

We are delighted to inform you about the vaccination collaboration between The Pulaski County Health
Department (PCHD) and Pulaski County Public Schools. Immunization rates have dropped in our country and
in Pulaski County. We often hear that parents find it difficult to arrange for Children to receive immunizations
with a physician or local health department. Because we believe in prevention and community service, we will
offer the inﬂtlkienza (Flu) vaccine to all our students this year. Immunizations will be given on October 19th, 20th,
21th, and 25 .

“Flu” is a contagious respiratory illness caused by inﬂuenza Viruses that infect the nose, throat and lungs. It is
spread mainly from person to person by droplets that are released in the air when an infected person coughs or
sneezes.

There will be no Charge to parents of Children who Choose to receive the ﬂu vaccine; however, Pulaski Health
Department will collect your insurance information and bill for the cost of the vaccine. Any cost not covered by
your insurance will not be billed to parents.

In order to provide vaccination to your Child, you will need to complete, sign, and return the attached Student
Flu Vaccination Consent form to your child’s school nurse by September 29, 2016. Please complete and
sign the Consent Form. In addition, you will want to read the Inﬂuenza (ﬂu) Vaccine Information Statement.
If a completed and signed consent form is not returned to the school, your Child will not be given the
vaccination.

You are under no obligation to participate. This is simply a serVice to parents of our students to alleViate the
hardship associated with trying to schedule a doctor’s Visit, securing transportation, and potentially missing
work in order to get your child’s ﬂu vaccination. When more people get vaccinated against the ﬂu, less ﬂu
illness can spread throughout our community.

 

 

Please remember that your Child does not have to participate in this vaccination opportunity and it does not
eliminate the need for your Child to receive regular CheCk-ups with your health care provider.

Sincerely,
7r-
/ ,- a’
*- A u,» -,:::_,/

Kevin W. Siers, Ed.D.
Division Superintendent

2016-17 STUDENT INFLUENZA VACCINATION CONSENT FORM YMMMHME‘EEEM
INACTIVATED INFLUENZA (IIV) ONLY

 

 

 

 

 

 

Name: Health Department Use Only
Last First Middle
. CI #:
Date of Birth: / / Age: Gender: El M El F
Encounter #:
If minor - parent/guardlan’s name: Last First Ml R e C eipt #:
ParenUGuardian’s Date of Birth: / / Parent’s SSN: - -
aptizmal
Address: City/State: ZIP:
Grade: Home Room Teacher: School:
IMPORTANT Parent/Guardian Phone # Home: Cell: Work:

 

 

 

 

Please Check YES or NO to all of the questions below to determine if your Child can receive the Inactivated Inﬂuenza
Vaccine (“ﬂu shot”). The nurse giving the vaccine will review this information on the day of the vaccine Clinic.

 

 

YES NO

1. Has your Child ever had a serious allergic reaction to any component of any ﬂu vaccine (eggs, D D
gentamicin, gelatin and arginine)?

2. Has your Child ever had a serious reaction to a previous dose of ﬂu vaccine in the past? D D

3. Has your Child ever had Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS, i.e., progressive ascending paralysis)? D D

 

If you answered YES to any of questions 1, 2 or 3 above about serious allergy, reaction or GBS, flu vaccine may not
be safe for your child and s/he WILL NOT receive a flu vaccine.

 

 

NOTICE OF DEEMED CONSENT FOR HIV, HEPATITIS B OR C TESTING
VDH is required by § 32.1—45.1 of the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended, to give you the following notice:
1. If any VDH health care professional, worker or employee should be directly exposed to your child’s blood or body ﬂuids in a way
that may transmit disease, I understand that the law requires my child to give a venous blood sample for further tests. I understand that
the tests to be performed are for human immunodeficiency Virus (HIV), as well as for Hepatitis B and C. A physician or other health
care provider will tell you the result of the test. 2. If your child should be directly exposed to blood or body ﬂuids of a VDH health
care professional, worker or employee in a way that may transmit disease, that person’s blood will be tested for infection with human
immunodeficiency Virus (HIV), as well as for Hepatitis B and C. A physician or other health care provider will tell you and that
person the result of the test.

 

 

 

CONSENT FOR CHILD’S VACCINATION: In October 2016, will your child be less than 9 years of age? No D Yes El
Please complete the next set of questions and sign.

My child is under 9 years of age and:
El has NEVER been vaccinated against the ﬂu. Note: Your child will require 2 doses this year.

El has not been vaccinated with at least 2 doses of seasonal inﬂuenza vaccine before July 1, 2016. Note: Your child will
require 2 doses this year

I have read the 2016 Vaccination Information Statement (VIS) for the Inactivated Inﬂuenza Vaccine (ﬂu shot), I understand the risks
and benefits, and I give consent to the Health Department and its authorized staff for my child named at the top of this form to receive
the inactivated injectable inﬂuenza vaccine (shot). If needed, I give my consent for my child to receive the second dose
approximately 4 weeks after the first.

Signature of Parent or Legal Guardian: X Date: / /

 

 

 

Turn to Back of Form

|nsurance*: Please answer the following: This information is required for federal funding purposes for VFC vaccines.

 

 

 

*Note: Vaccines will be provided to your child without cost to you if your child is eligible for the Vaccines for Children Program. If
your child is covered by a private health insurance plan, the Department is required by law to seek reimbursement for all allowable
costs associated with the provision of the vaccine.

 

My child: ( ) is not insured (by private insurance, Medicaid, or FAMIS)
( ) is American Indian or is an Alaska Native
( ) has Medicaid — Medicaid #:
( ) has FAMIS — FAMIS #:
( ) has other insurance not listed above (specify plan) __________
Policy ID # _________Policy holder’s name
Attach a copy of the front & back of insurance card or provide the following information:
Insurance company address

Insurance company phone number

 

 

Ofﬁce of Privacy and Security
Authorization for Disclosure of Protected Health Information
This consent gives the Virginia Department of Health (VDH) permission to disclose personal health information to the
person(s) or organization(s) I have indicated.

0 I understand the provision of treatment to my Child cannot be conditioned on my signing of this authorization.

0 Any health information redisclosed by me or my Child will no longer be protected by this authorization.

o The original or a copy of the authorization shall be included with my child’s medical record.

0 I have the right to revoke this authorization at any time, except to the extent that action has been taken prior to my
request to withhold my medical record. The request must be in writing and will be effective upon delivery to the
provider in possession of my medical records.

0 I authorize VDH to disclose my child’s health information to his/her primary care physician and school.

I understand that this record will be retained until my Child reaches 21 years of age.

0 I authorize VDH release records necessary to support the application for payment by Medicare, Medicaid, and
other health care benefits. The third party payer to pay any authorized benefits to VDH on my behalf.

0 I understand this document will be given to and retained by the public health department and will not be
maintained by the school.

El Please Check box if you wish to receive a copy of the Virginia Department of Health Privacy Rights.
Please send a copy of my child’s immunization record to her/his doctor at the following address.

Doctor’s Name

 

Mailing Address City State ZIP

 

 

HEALTH DEPARTMENT USE ONLY

 

Date Item code Cost type Lot Number Vaccine Administration site Provider #

 

VFC RA LA

chargeable

 

VFC RA LA

 

 

 

 

 

chargeable

 

Comments

 

 

Provider Namelsignamre and Date

 

 

