IN-STORE USE ONLY Walmart and Sam's Club Vaccine Administration Record and Informed Consent Walmart ®

 

Section A {please printclearly)

 

 

 

First Name: Last Name: Gender: El Female E] Male Date of Birth:
Race/Ethnicity: Mother's Maiden Name
Home Address: City: State: Zip: Phone Number:

 

Walmart/Samswillsend immunizationinformationfromthisvisitto yourPrimaryCare Providerusingthe contactinformation provided below.

DO YOU haVe a Primary Care PrOVider? E] NO [I YES Primary Care Provider Name: Street Name:
Vaccine Requested:

E] Flu E] Pneumococcal Dshingles EITdap EITd E] MMR E] HepA E] HepB DMeningococcal DVaricella DHPV

 

Section B The following questions will help us determine your eligibility to be vaccinated today.

Questions 1 through 6 be low pe rtai n to all vacci nes. The questions below will allow us to determine your eligibility to receive vaccin es.

 

1. Is the person to be vaccinated feeling sick today or do they havea moderate to high fever? YES NO
Pharmacist Initials:

 

 

 

 

 

2. Does the person to be vaccinated have allergies to medications, food components, vaccine components, or latex? YES NO
Examples: eggs, bovine protein, gelatin, gentamicin, polymyxin, neomycin, phenol, yeast, thimerosal
3. Does the person to be vaccinated have a chronic condition or long term health problem? YES NO
Examples: heart disease, lung disease, asthma, kidney disease, diabetes, anemia, otherblooddisorders, oris the patienta smoker?
4. Has the person to be vaccinated ever hadaserious reaction afterreceivinganimmunization? YES NO
5. Has the person to be vaccinated ever had a seizure disorder, brain disorder, or Guillain»Barre Syndrome, or a nervous system problems?
YES NO
6. Is the person to be vaccinated currently pregnant, considering becoming pregnant in the next month , or breastfeeding? YES NO

 

Please also answerthe questions belowifyouwillbe receivinga LIVEvaccine (varicella, measles/mumps/rubella (MMRII), shingles).

 

7. Has the person to be vaccinated received anyvaccinations orskin testsin the pastfourweeks YES NO

 

8. Does the person to be vaccinated have weakened immune system or is in contact with anyone with a severely weakened immune system?
Examples: cancer, leukemia, lymphoma, HIV/AIDS, transplantorany other immune system disorder YES NO

 

9. Is the person to be vaccinated currently on home infusions, weekly injections, steroid therapy, anticancer drugs, antivirals or radiation treatment?

 

 

YES NO
10. Has the person to be vaccinated received a transfusion of blood or blood products, or been given immune (gamma) globulin during the past year?
YES NO
11. Doesthe person tobe vaccinatedhaveahistoryofthrombocytopenia orthrombocytopenia purpura(MMR|lon|y) YES NO

 

Section C Please read the section below carefully and sign and do te acknowledging that you understand and agree.

 

I hereby give my consent to Walmart, as applicable, to administer the medications(s) I have requested above. I understand the benefits and risks of
receiving this medication and have received, read and/or had explained to me the Vaccine Information Statement on the vaccine(s) I have elected to
receive. I acknowledge that I have had a chance to ask questions and that such questions were answered to my satisfaction. I acknowledge that I have
been advised to remain near the vaccination location for approximately 20 minutes after administration for observation by the administering healthcare
provider. On behalf of myself, my heirs, and personal representatives, I fully release and discharge Walmart , its staff, agents, successor, division, affiliates,
officers, directors, contractors, and employees from any and all liabilities or claims whether known or unknown arising in any way related to the
administration of the vaccine(s) listed above. Initials:

I understand the purposes/benefits of my state's immunization registry and acknowledge that, depending upon my state law, I may prevent disclosure of
my immunization to the state registry with a signed Opt»0ut. Initials:

| assign payment of authorized insurance benefits due to me to be paid to the pharmacy. | consent to the release of medical information when necessary

 

for billing, reimbursement, and medical protocol. Initials:

 

lam aware an immunization certified student pharmacist might be administering this medication. Initials:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Parent] Legal Guardian] Patie nt Name: Signature: Date:
Section D Thefollowingsectian is to be completed by the health care provider only.
Immunizing Pharmacist Name(print) Immunizing Pharmacist Signature
Intern Name (print) Administration Date/Date VIS Given:
Vaccine Lot# Exp. Date Manufacturer NDC Dosage Site (LA/RA) Route(SQ/|M) VIS Date RPh Initials
LA RA SQ IM
LA RA SQ IM
LA RA SQ IM
Standing OrderPhysician Automated Reporting
Prescribing Pharmacist Name: Manual Reporting Intitials: Date: Time:

 

 

Patient Specific Prescription Physician Name Fax:

Standing Order: Automated Reporting unless documented below.
'Manual Reporting (Twinrix, Prescription)
Initials/DatelTime

APPENDIX C — Patient Health Questionnaire & Consent Form Supplement — All Vaccines

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

General Screening: The Pharmacist MUST ask the following questions to determine the Yes No
safety of all vaccines to be given
1. Are you sick today?
If Question 1. Answer is yes:

A. Do you have a new fever?

B. Do you have a cough?

C. Do you have diarrhea?

D. Have you been vomiting?
2. Have you ever fainted or felt dizzy after receiving a vaccine?
3. Have you ever had a reaction after receiving a vaccine?
4. Do you have a Iong-term health problem with heart disease, lung disease, asthma,
kidney disease, neurologic or neuromuscular disease, liver disease, metabolic disease
(e.g., diabetes),or anemia or another blood disorder?
5. Do you have a weakened immune system because of HIV/AIDS or another disease that
affects the immune system, Iong-term treatment with drugs such as high-dose steroids, or
cancer treatment with radiation or drugs?
6. Do you have allergies to latex, medications, food or vaccines? (Examples: eggs, bovine
protein, gelatin, gentamicin, polymyxin, neomycin, phenol, yeast or thimerosal)
7. Have you ever had a seizure disorder for which you are on seizure medications, a brain
disorder, Guillain-Barré syndrome or other nervous system problems?
8. For women: Are you pregnant or considering becoming pregnant in the next month?
APPENDIX D- Patient Health Questionnaire & Consent Form Supplement — Live Vaccines
General Screening: The Pharmacist must as the following questions to determine the Yes No

safety of live vaccines to be given

 

1. Are you currently on home infusions or weekly injections (such as Remicade, Humira,
Enbrel, Cimzia, Simponi, Simponi Aria, Xeljanz, Orencia, Arava, Actermra, Cytoxan,
Rituxan, adalimumab, infliximab or etanercept), high-dose methotrexate, azathioprine or
6-mercaptopurine, antivirals, anticancer drugs or radiation treatments?

 

2. Have you received any vaccinations or skin tests in the past four weeks?

 

3. Have you received a transfusion of blood, blood products or been given a medication
called immune (gamma) globulin in the past year?

 

 

4. Are you currently taking high-dose steroid therapy (prednisone >20mg/day or
equivalent) for longer than two weeks?

 

 

 

 

 

